Virginia Tech, School of Plant  
and Environmental Sciences 
101E Price Hall, 170 Drillfield Dr. 
Blacksburg, VA 24061 
P: (757) 694-7128 
srideout@vt.edu 
 
 
 
Date: July 20, 2022 
 
Tomato Disease Update – 2022  
 
I have been hearing about many maladies visiting both commercial and garden grown tomatoes 
for 2022.  Many have complained of having ‘blight’ and that it is particularly bad this year.  
Technically, blight is a symptom not a specific disease, and from what I have seen and 
diagnosed in 2022, there are multiple pathogens that are unwelcome visitors to the 
Commonwealth.  Below, I will review the most common tomato diseases and disorders in 
Virginia.  While pictures and descriptions can be informative, I advise you to contact your 
Virginia Cooperative Extension Agent (https://ext.vt.edu/offices.html) to ensure proper 
identification and subsequently determine proper control measures.  More information on 
disease control can be found within the mid-Atlantic Commercial Vegetable Production Guide 
(https://www.pubs.ext.vt.edu/content/dam/pubs_ext_vt_edu/456/456-420/SPES-391.pdf) or 
the Home Grounds and Animals Pest Management Guide 
(https://www.pubs.ext.vt.edu/content/dam/pubs_ext_vt_edu/456/456-018/ENTO-462.pdf). 
More pictures can be found at www.facebook.com/vtvegpp.  All these resources will provide 
more information on cultural and chemical practices available to growers and gardeners. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Late Blight 
Late blight is a historic disease that conjures up thoughts of the Irish Potato Famine.  The 
disease cannot overwinter in Virginia (fortunately) and has to arrive on weather systems or 
other agricultural supplies (ie. transplants, debris, fruit, etc.).  Late blight is caused by the 
oomycete (fungal-like) pathogen Phytophthora infestans.  Plant pathologists in the United 
States track this pathogen and current reports can be viewed at www.usablight.org.  The 
website also contains information about the historic disease. 
Fortunately, I have not seen this particular disease in Virginia to date in 2022.  So far, it has only 
been reported in Florida.  Below is a picture of late blight on tomato from 2009.  More 
information can also be found at:  https://www.pubs.ext.vt.edu/ANR/ANR-6/ANR-
6.html?fbclid=IwAR0nRp3ZQsTxnN0xue-I7veS6LUAX_EOa40ilAkm-kX0Nz-jrEsizIdtUpw 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Early Blight 
Early blight is caused by fungi in the Alternaria genus.  Although it shares the ‘blight’ part of 
name, it differs in biology and control from late blight.  The disease is endemic to the 
Commonwealth and is favored by warm and humid weather.  The fungus can overwinter on 
debris in soil or other contaminated agricultural supplies (such as dirty stakes).  Characteristic 
to early blight are lesions that are shaped like targets (concentric rings).  When particularly 
severe, stem cankers may appear sharing the bullseye type patterns seen on foliar lesions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Septoria Leaf spot 
This disease is very common in Virginia and is caused by the fungus Septoria lycopersici.  Void of 
concentric rings like early blight, these lesions are darker in color and, in latter stages, may 
showcase a tan center.  Severe infections will result in the leaves yellowing and defoliation.  The 
disease is also favored by warm temperatures and high humidity.  Septoria leaf spot spreads 
through splashing spores from an infected location to a new one.  Initial infections generally 
result from soil splashing from rainfall.  Thus, mulching around plants and limiting foliage 
moisture may assist in slowing disease.  This fungus can also overwinter in Virginia in plant 
debris within soil. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Bacterial Spot/Speck 
Bacterial spot is caused by Xanthomonas sp. and speck by Pseudomonas sp.  However, I will 
discuss them together since they are practically indistinguishable in the field with biology and 
control methods being similar.  Many bacterial infections start in the greenhouse or transplant 
rearing facility.  However, the pathogens have been found to overwinter in plant debris in soil 
and on items such as tomato stakes and seeds.  The disease is favored by, once again, high 
humidity.  Lesions generally are circular and have yellow halos around them.  In severe cases 
tomato stems and fruit can be infected.  The disease usually starts from the base of the plant 
and works it way upwards.  Reducing canopy moisture is critical to slowing down these two 
bacterial diseases.  Using disease free transplants and seeds is also crucial.  Avoid working 
(staking, stringing, etc.) the plants when leaves are wet as this will increase the likelihood of 
disease spread. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Tomato Spotted Wilt Virus 
Tomato Spotted Wilt Virus (TSWV) is a viral pathogen vectored by thrips.  Within this list, no 
tomato disease can present such an array of symptoms.  Plants can be stunted, leaves crinkled, 
fruit can be misshapen or have brown lesions.  In severe cases, plants can die.  TSWV is worse in 
years where the previous winter was milder and most importantly, when drier conditions favor 
thrips.  The most effective control of TSWV is through resistance cultivars, although 
management of thrips populations is also important.  Several other vegetable crops can be 
infected by TSWV. 
 
 
 
 

 
Southern Blight 
Southern blight is caused by a soilborne fungal pathogen Athelia rolfsii (formerly known as 
Sclerotium rolfsii).  Virginia is a transitional state for this devastating pathogen, with it much 
more prevalent in the Tidewater, Eastern Shore and Southside VA regions.  The pathogen can 
cause complete plant collapse within days, particularly under warm and humid conditions.  
White fungal growth and characteristic sclerotia (brown and round) can be found during 
periods of favorable conditions (see pictures below). More information on this pathogen can be 
found at: https://www.pubs.ext.vt.edu/content/dam/pubs_ext_vt_edu/spes/spes-325/SPES-
325.pdf 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Bacterial Wilt 
Bacterial wilt is caused by a soilborne pathogen, Ralstonia solanacearum.  This is another 
pathogen that is more prevalent in the southern and eastern areas of the state.  The pathogen 
causes plant collapse, seemingly overnight, where plants droop and leaves go from green to 
brown.  This generally occurs in clustered distributions and is a result of the bacterium clogging 
vascular systems and limiting water uptake.  Thus, bacterial wilt resembles water stress in 
tomato.  The pathogen can survive in soils for several years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Blossom End Rot 
Though technically not a disease, blossom end rot (BER) is the most common disorder in 
tomato in Virginia.  Information on BER is listed below along with a picture.  It is common for 
BER-compromised fruit to be infected by secondary pathogens.   
 
 

 
 
Herbicide Damage 
It is also very common to see herbicide damage on tomato.  While there are various herbicides 
that produce a wide range of symptoms on tomato, the most common herbicide damage is 
from 2,4-D.  This herbicide is a growth regulating herbicide and has a propensity to drift to non-
target locations.  As in the below picture, leaves show signature distorted stems and leaves. 
 
 
 
I hope that will help, however, there are many other diseases of tomato that are not discussed 
here that occur in Virginia regularly.  Please remember to  
 
 
Steve Rideout, Ph.D. 
Professor and Extension Specialist of Plant Pathology 
Virginia Tech – School of Plant and Environmental Sciences 
srideout@vt.edu 
www.facebook.com/vtvegpp