1 
Bulletin #56 
Common Tomato Disorders 
Under Desert Conditions 
Whether you call it a fruit or vege-
table, the tomato is the most popu-
lar of all home-grown foods in the 
United States.  A survey by the 
National 
Gardener 
Association 
found 93% of the American gar-
deners surveyed grew tomatoes.  
The main reason for the popularity 
of this nutritious vegetable is its 
excellent flavor and yield.  Unfortunately, there are more 
production problems growing tomatoes than growing 
many other vegetables.  
 
Harsh climatic conditions, nutrient deficiencies, poor cul-
tural practices and disease all bring on disorders that limit 
tomato production.  Common problems include blossom 
drop, blossom end rot, curling leaves, sunscald, herbicide 
damage, cracking and poor overall growth.  Gardeners 
can minimize these problems by using good cultural prac-
tices and common sense.  Here’s how. 
 
Blossom Drop 
The most often asked question by southwest tomato 
growers is, “Why do tomato blossoms drop?”  Blossom 
drop may be caused by one or more of the following. 
 
Too low to too high temperatures 
 
Low humidity 
 
Unusually heavy fruit set 
 
Improper watering 
 
Poor fertility practices 
 
Tomatoes grow best if temperatures range between 70°F 
and 90°F, but can tolerate temperatures lower than 55°F 
and higher than 100°F for short periods.  However, ex-
tended periods lower or higher than these temperatures 
abort the blossoms.  Temperatures lower than 55°F for 
four or more consecutive nights cause blossoms to drop. 
 
Temperatures that are higher than 90°F during the day 
are the main cause of blossom drop.  In fact, tempera-
tures over 104°F for four hours or more cause the flowers 
to abort.  Night temperatures higher than 75°F will also 
cause blossom abortion.  These sustained, hot tempera-
tures at night burn up the food reserves the tomato pro-
duced during the day and the flowers abort. 
 
A tomato flower has both male (stamen) and female (pistil) 
parts with the same flower.  The yellow stamen wraps 
around the greenish pistil in the center of the flower.  Un-
der proper conditions, pollen from the stamen transfers to 
the sticky stigma or tip of the pistil.  This transfer requires 
a jarring wind or a flick of the finger.  Without pollination, 
which stimulates fruit set, the flower withers and dies. 
 
Relative humidity plays a major role in pollen transfer.  
Tomatoes set best when humidity is between 40% and 
70%.  The Southwest has long, dry periods with the hu-
midity below 20%.  As a result, pollen does not stick to the 
dry stigma.  Calm, windless summer days also contribute 
to flower drop. 
 
Directing a strong jet of water at the blossoms twice during 
the heat of the day will improve blossom set when the day-
time temperatures range between 90°F and 100°F and 
below 75°F at night.  The evaporating moisture lowers the 
temperature, raises the humidity and jars the pollen loose, 
improving set.  If daytime temperatures exceed 100°F and 
night temperatures stay above 75°F, this technique is not 
effective. 
 
Many gardeners give up on tomatoes when the plants stop 
setting.  Tomatoes will produce again in the fall when tem-
peratures cool.  Gardeners should continue to fertilize and 
water during the period of no fruit set to ensure well devel-
oped and productive plants for the fall.  
 
An unusually heavy fruit set on young plants is another 
reason for blossom drop.  Strong competition by develop-
ing fruits for existing food reserves within small or weak 
plants limits the energy available to the new flowers.  Alt-
hough the plant may set blossoms initially, its poor condi-
tion may not withstand the increased competition for food 
and many blossoms and fruit will abort.  Those left will not 
develop or grow properly.  Once fruit is picked, the plant 

2 
Common Tomato Disorders Under Desert Conditions 
Bulletin #56 
can redirect its energy and grow.  A sufficient supply of 
food will be directed to the flowers and blossoms will then 
set again. 
 
Excessive irrigations and water stress also cause blos-
som drop.  Proper irrigation is important.  The root zone 
should be kept uniformly moist throughout the growing 
season to develop a large, healthy root system.  Tomato 
roots have a potential to grow to a depth of 3 to 5 feet.  
However, shallow watering, heavy wet, poorly-drained 
soils, caliche or hard pan interfere with deep rooting.  
Every effort should be made to avoid or remedy these 
adverse conditions. 
 
Two or three deep irrigations during the first month after 
planting will help establish the plants.  After that, deep 
irrigations should be continued throughout the growing 
season. 
 
High or low application rates of fertilizer will also cause 
blossom drop.  Over-fertilization may cause water stress 
resulting in tissue damage inside the tomatoes.  Under-
fertilization leads to spindly vines with low food reserves 
that cannot support a crop. 
 
To determine the tomatoes’ nitrogen needs, stems should 
be examined 6 inches back from the end of the major 
branches.  Ideally the stems should be the thickness of 
your small finger.  If smaller, nitrogen fertilizer should be 
applied.  If stems are larger and growth is vigorous, ferti-
lizer, especially nitrogen, should not be added. 
 
Blossom-End Rot 
Blossom end rot is a large, dark, sunken, leathery spot 
found on the bottom or blossom end of tomato fruits.  
Disfigured fruits usually appear in late spring and early 
summer, particularly following a heavy fruit set or a sus-
tained dry period.  To avoid continued development of 
blossom end rot, fruit should be thinned and adequate 
irrigation provided.  
 
A lack of calcium also contributes to blossom end rot.  
Calcium is required for proper cell wall development.  
However, calcium moves slowly in water stressed plants.  
Light, infrequent irrigations cause more blossom end rot 
than the lack of calcium in the soil.  Light, frequent irriga-
tions also contribute to blossom end rot because an ade-
quate root system is not developed to allow enough 
calcium to be removed from the soil.  Deep, infrequent 
irrigations are best. 
 
Blossom end rot can be controlled by continuously 
providing ample water and good drainage.  The soil 
around the tomato should be heavily mulched during 
the summer to reduce moisture fluctuation.  A calcium 
fertilizer such as calcium nitrate should be applied if 
needed. 
 
Curly Top Virus 
Virus diseases in crops are very difficult to control and 
can result in severe losses.  It is also hard to predict 
severity and incidence from season to season due to 
complex interactions that exist among the pathogen 
(virus), host (plant attacked), vector (organism that 
transmits the virus), virus source, and environment.  
Because of these uncertainties, it is difficult for growers 
to adopt control strategies and apply them year to year. 
 
Curly Top Virus (CTV) is widely distributed across the 
west and is transmitted by the beet leafhopper.  Beet 
leafhoppers feed on many crops including tomatoes, 
beets, peppers, squash, beans, cucurbits (squash, mel-
ons, and cucumbers), spinach, potatoes, and other 
crops.  Weeds and ornamentals are also susceptible.  
As the plant becomes infected, leaves become puck-
ered and stunted.  Tomato leaves curl and roll upward 
and the main leaf petiole curves downward.  The 
leaves also become leathery and turn yellowish.  Even-
tually the plant stops growing and dies.  The infected 
tomatoes turn red even when immature and edible size 
fruit may be bitter tasting. 
 
Spraying insecticides on tomato plants is not an effec-
tive leafhopper control strategy.  In fact, leafhoppers do 
not prefer tomatoes as a food source.  They inadvert-
ently land on the plant, feed, then move on.  Their pre-
ferred food source is often weeds.  As the weeds dry 
up, the leafhoppers move into cropped areas to forage.  

3 
Common Tomato Disorders Under Desert Conditions 
Bulletin #56# 
As far as we know, there is little secondary spread of 
the CTV from one tomato plant to the next within a 
field. 
 
One preventative strategy is to control weeds adjacent 
to cropped areas before transplants are planted.  Tum-
bleweed (Russian thistle) is a favorite food source of 
beet leafhoppers.  Fine mesh barriers (ramie or other 
horticultural fabric) are another strategy to prevent leaf-
hoppers from feeding.  There are also four CTV re-
sistant tomato varieties. These are: Roza, Rowpac, 
Columbia and Saladmaster.  These four varieties are 
also resistant to Verticillium and Fusarium.  
 
Splitting Fruit 
Split fruit is often caused by erratic or excessive irriga-
tion.  Some tomato varieties are prone to splitting. 
Tomato Hornworm 
The tomato hornworm (Manduca quinquemaculata) is 
a sphinx moth.  The word “hornworm” described the 
distinctive pointed structure on its tail.  The tomato 
hornworm larva is green with diagonal white lines on 
the side of each segment that form L-shapes.  The 
adults are large gray moths with a wingspan of five 
inches.  They have four yellow-orange patches on 
each side of their abdomen.  The larvae (hornworms) 
can reach four inches in length.  Experienced tomato 
growers monitor for damage (chewed leaves and 
stems) and frass (droppings).  The hornworms are 
usually in the interior of the plant during daylight 
hours.  Hand picking the larvae is the best control op-
tion. 
 
Updated August 1, 2007 
http://extension.arizona.edu/yavapai 
 
 
The University of Arizona is an equal opportunity, affirmative action institution. The University does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, 
age, disability, veteran status, or sexual orientation in its programs and activities.