Authors 
Daniel S. Egel,  
Purdue University
Shubin K. Saha,  
University of Kentucky
Purdue Botany & Plant Pathology
ag.purdue.edu/BTNY
University of Kentucky Horticulture
www.uky.edu/hort
Photos by the authors
Vegetable Diseases
Tomato Disease Management 
in Greenhouses
Purdue Extension publication BP-197-W
University of Kentucky Cooperative Extension publication ID-233
EXTENSION
However, greenhouse tomatoes are not 
free from disease; they have their own set 
of problems. Greenhouse tomatoes often 
experience conditions of high relative 
humidity, which is due to the enclosed 
nature of the structure. Under high 
relative humidity, the diseases discussed 
below are more likely to occur. 
In addition, greenhouse tomatoes 
grown in-ground to maturity are often 
not rotated with another crop, which 
increases disease pressure. Tomatoes 
grown in containers to maturity do not 
have the same crop rotation requirements. 
Tomatoes grown in a greenhouse for 
transplant production are exposed to 
greenhouse conditions for only a few 
weeks. 
Common Diseases of 
Greenhouse Tomatoes
Three of the most common tomato 
diseases in the greenhouse are discussed 
below, however, this list is not exhaustive. 
Many more diseases may occur in Indiana 
and Kentucky greenhouses.
Over the last several years, an increasing 
number of growers have built greenhouses 
for early production of vegetables. Tomato 
is, by far, the most common vegetable 
crop grown in greenhouses in Indiana and 
Kentucky.
By definition, a “greenhouse” is a structure 
that is actively heated with some sort 
of fuel (propane, wood, etc.), whereas a 
“high tunnel” is passively heated by solar 
radiation. This publication uses the term 
“greenhouse” for both types of structures, 
because the disease management issues for 
greenhouses and high tunnels are similar. 
This publication will examine common 
tomato diseases of the greenhouse and 
provide management recommendations.
Different Conditions, 
Different Issues 
Most vegetable diseases require leaves 
to be wet in order for infection to occur 
and they rely on rain to spread. Since 
greenhouse structures keep rainfall 
off plants, these structures reduce leaf 
wetness. For this reason, diseases common 
in field tomatoes such as early blight, 
Septoria leaf blight, bacterial spot, and 
bacterial canker are less common in a 
greenhouse than they are in a field.

2
Vegetable Diseases • Tomato Disease Management in Greenhouses  •  BP-197-W & ID-233
Gray Mold (Botrytis cinerea)
Gray mold affects many vegetable and ornamental 
crops. Vegetable hosts include tomato, lettuce, pepper, 
and snap bean. If left uncontrolled, gray mold can 
cause severe symptoms on leaves, stems, and fruit. 
Gray mold lesions often start as small, water-soaked 
areas on leaves. Under dry conditions, the lesions turn 
a light brown. Lesions often are wedge-shaped with the 
wide edge on the leaf margin (Figure 1). One can easily 
observe the growth of the causal fungus with a 10x 
hand lens. Gray mold may also cause lesions on stems 
and fruit (Figures 2 and 3).
Since gray mold often infects injured tissue, 
growers should avoid practices that wound plants. 
Temperatures above 75ºF decrease disease severity. 
Any practice that lowers relative humidity tends 
to lower the severity of gray mold and many other 
diseases (see suggestions at the end of this publication). 
Adding lime to soils to increase the calcium content 
of tomato plants may help to reduce the susceptibility 
of tomato plants to gray mold. The fungus that causes 
gray mold survives season-to-season in crop residue.
Figure 1. The symptoms of Botrytis gray mold include a wedge-shaped 
lesion on tomato leaves. One can observe the gray sporulation of the fungus 
with a 10x hand lens.
Figure 2. Light brown necrotic area on a stem due to gray mold.
Figure 3. Rotten fruit with sporulating gray mold fungus visible.

3
Vegetable Diseases • Tomato Disease Management in Greenhouses  •  BP-197-W & ID-233
Leaf Mold (Passalora fulva)
Although leaf mold produces quite noticeable 
leaf symptoms, the disease is usually not serious, 
depending on how soon into the season the disease 
occurs. Leaf mold causes bright yellow, blotchy 
lesions on the top of tomato leaves (Figure 4). On the 
undersides of leaves, the fungus that causes leaf mold 
can clearly be seen as an olive-green “fuzz” (Figure 
5). Under severe conditions, the fungus can be seen 
growing on the top of the leaf as well. 
Lesions do not appear on stems or fruit. The spores are 
easily airborne, which spreads the disease throughout 
the greenhouse. Spore germination is favored by high 
humidity. The optimum temperatures for leaf mold are 
between 72ºF and 75ºF. 
An excellent management strategy is to use tomato 
varieties that have resistance to leaf mold. However, 
some resistant varieties are not listed as such and 
variability in the fungus population may overcome the 
tomato plant’s resistance. Other management options 
include taking measures to reduce humidity, increase 
airflow, and improve sanitation. The fungus that causes 
leaf mold survives season-to-season in crop residue. 
White Mold (Sclerotinia sclerotiorum) 
White mold can kill plants, so this disease can be a 
very serious disease in greenhouses. The first symptom 
is often the wilting of scattered tomato plants. Upon 
closer inspection, the lower stem of an affected plant 
may have a light brown lesion that girdled the plant, 
causing it to wilt and possibly die.
The lesions appear woody, which is how this disease 
got its alternate name: timber rot. The lesions are often 
accompanied by the white growth of the causal fungus 
as well as dark, irregularly shaped fungal structures 
(sclerotia) (see Figure 6). Sclerotia are found on the 
outside or inside of the stem and allow the fungus to 
overwinter several years in the soil without a host. 
White mold may also cause a rot of tomato fruit 
(Figure 7). 
In spring, sclerotia germinate to form miniature, 
mushroom-like fruiting structures, several of which 
could fit on a dime. Spores from these structures 
can infect a wide host range of plants. Since sclerotia 
germinate into mushrooms in the spring, symptoms of 
white mold on tomato plants often occur in the spring 
or early summer. 
Figure 4. Leaf mold of tomato causes bright yellow, blotchy lesions on the 
tops of leaves. 
Figure 5. The undersides of leaves infected with leaf mold lesions often 
have an olive-green fungal fuzz. 

4
Vegetable Diseases • Tomato Disease Management in Greenhouses  •  BP-197-W & ID-233
White mold does not spread from plant to plant except 
when an infected plant directly contacts an unaffected 
plant. Cool temperatures (59ºF to 70ºF), high humidity, 
and moist conditions are all favorable for the disease. 
Crop rotations of continuous tomato also seem to 
favor the disease; however, the causal fungus has a 
large host range, so crop rotation with other vegetables 
may be insufficient to control the disease. The fungus 
that causes white mold survives year-to-year as dark 
sclerotia that may be found on or in the stem.
General Management Methods
Here are some general management practices that 
can help reduce the incidence and severity of tomato 
diseases in greenhouses.
Crop Rotation
Rotating out of tomato or related solanaceous crops 
for three to four years will help to control most tomato 
diseases. However, many vegetable growers who 
operate greenhouses find it  economically impractical 
to rotate away from tomatoes. If you choose to grow 
tomatoes after tomatoes without crop rotation, you can 
improve disease management by removing as much of  
the tomato plant as possible from the greenhouse and 
away from all potential production areas as soon as the 
crop is finished in the late summer or fall. 
To further reduce the amount of crop residue that 
enters the soil between tomato crops, you can place 
a cloth ground covering between each row. Figure 8 
shows a white woven ground cover between rows of 
tomatoes in black plastic mulch. Such a ground cover 
will help prevent the buildup of crop residue that might 
contain plant disease microbes from entering the soil. 
It also helps eliminate weeds and allows the greenhouse 
to be easily swept. 
The white ground cover shown in Figure 8 rests on 
top of black landscape cloth (Figure 9), making the 
ground cover easy to clean re-use. While the white 
ground cover can be washed, sanitized, and re-used 
next season, the black landscape cloth is not re-useable. 
Note that the white ground cover can reflect light into 
the canopy to maximize solar radiation; however, black 
ground covers are also used successfully. 
Figure 6. The wood-like area of the stem shown here is typical of white 
mold (timber rot) of tomato. The dark, irregular-shaped fungal bodies 
shown here are telltale overwintering structures. 
Figure 7. Tomato fruit can also express white mold symptoms.
Figure 8. This photo shows a white, reusable ground cover that can help 
prevent crop debris from entering the soil, reduce weed pressure, and allow 
the greenhouse floor to be easily swept.

5
Vegetable Diseases • Tomato Disease Management in Greenhouses  •  BP-197-W & ID-233
Greenhouse Ventilation
In general, any practice that reduces relative humidity 
and moisture in a greenhouse will reduce the severity 
of many tomato diseases. 
Follow these practices that help to ventilate 
greenhouses:
1. Ventilate the greenhouse in the evening with 
relatively dry air when possible. When cool 
temperatures are a concern, such as in high tunnels 
where heating is passive, it becomes  important to 
close the structure before dusk to allow heat to build 
up before temperatures start to drop. This practice 
traps heat to avoid overnight cold damage. However, 
once cool temperatures are no longer a concern, 
ventilate the greenhouse at dusk so that the drier 
air from outside may replace humid air inside the 
greenhouse.
2. Plant spacing can vary, but a good starting point 
would be rows spaced 4 to 5 feet apart and 20 to 24 
inches between plants within the row. Placing too 
many tomato plants in a high tunnel may restrict 
airflow and increase humidity. In addition, research 
has shown that placing tomatoes closer than about 
20 inches within a row on 5-foot centers decreases 
fruit size. 
3. Prune tomato plants to facilitate airflow. This 
is especially useful with indeterminate tomato 
varieties. Avoid pruning too much material at any 
one time. As a general rule, leave indeterminate 
tomatoes with at least 18 to 20 fully mature leaves 
after pruning. Determinate tomato plants are often 
pruned until the first flower cluster, improving 
airflow and encouraging larger tomato fruit. 
4. To further reduce humidity and leaf wetness in 
greenhouses, use appropriate air circulation fans. 
The placement and number of fans depends on the 
volume of air within the structure. 
Fungicides
Fungicides can help to reduce the severity of tomato 
diseases in the greenhouse. However, fungicides are 
no substitute for good management practices. Consult 
your state extension service for publications that 
provide the most current fungicide recommendations. 
In Kentucky, see The Vegetable Production Guide 
for Commercial Growers (University of Kentucky 
Extension publication ID-36, www.ca.uky.edu/
agcomm/pubs.asp). In Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, 
Minnesota, Missouri, and Ohio, see the Midwest 
Vegetable Production Guide for Commercial Growers 
(Purdue Extension publication mwveguide.org). 
Always read and follow labels carefully. 
Here is a general overview of fungicides, listed by the 
active ingredient, that are labeled and effective for the 
greenhouse tomato diseases discussed above: 
• Botrytis gray mold. 2, 6 – dichloro-4-nitroanaline, 
copper, mancozeb, penthiopyrad, pyrimethanil, and 
cyprodinil/fludioxanil. 
• Leaf mold. copper, mancozeb, difenconazole/
cyprodinil, difenconazole/mandipromid, and 
cymoxanil/famoxadone. 
• White mold (timber rot). The only product currently 
labeled for white mold is Contans®, which is a 
parasite of the white mold fungus. This product must 
be incorporated into the top 1 to 2 inches of soil. See 
label for detailed instructions. 
Figure 9. Black landscape fabric that lies underneath the white ground 
cover shown in Figure 8. The landscape fabric keeps the white ground cover 
relatively clean. 

6
Vegetable Diseases • Tomato Disease Management in Greenhouses  •  BP-197-W & ID-233
Order or download materials from 
Purdue Extension • The Education Store
www.edustore.purdue.edu
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, sex, marital status, familial 
status, parental status, religion, sexual orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or a part of an individual's income is derived from any public assistance program. 
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) 
should contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of discrimination write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, 
S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
Dec 2015
Additional items to consider when selecting a product 
from the above list:
• Carefully note the re-entry interval (REI) and pre-
harvest interval (PHI). Some products may have
intervals sufficiently long to restrict their use to early
season. In particular, mancozeb products and 2, 6 –
dichloro-4-nitroanaline have relatively long PHIs.
• Copper and mancozeb products are contact
fungicides. Contans® is neither contact nor systemic
and must be incorporated into the soil. The
remaining products are systemic and will move
within the plant after application.
In Indiana, products are allowed for greenhouse 
use unless stated otherwise in the label. For more 
information about greenhouse use of fungicides see 
Table 17 in the Midwest Vegetable Production Guide for 
Commercial Growers in Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, 
Minnesota, Missouri, and Ohio; and the disease 
control of vegetable crops section in the Vegetable 
Production Guide for Commercial Growers in Kentucky. 
Reference to products in this publication 
is not intended to be an endorsement to 
the exclusion of others that may be similar. 
Individuals using such products assume 
responsibility for their use in accordance with 
current directions of the manufacturer.
Find Out More
Find more publications in the Vegetable Diseases 
series by visiting the Purdue Extension Education 
Store, www.edustore.purdue.edu.
Resources for vegetable growers are also available 
from the University of Kentucky Integrated Pest 
Management Program, 
www.uky.edu/Ag/IPM/ipmveg/vegipm.htm.