Early blight, caused by the fungus Alternaria, and Septoria leaf spot, caused by the fungus Septoria, are
two destructive tomato diseases which occur each year in the northeastern United States. Both fungi
attack foliage, killing the leaves, weakening the plant and ultimately reducing fruit production.
Although these two diseases produce similar symptoms, they can be distinguished from one another if
observed closely. It is very important to determine which disease, early blight or Septoria leaf spot, is
present, because they require somewhat different management techniques. Neither fungus is easily
managed with chemicals once the disease begins. Repeated applications must be made to protect the
plants as new foliage develops. Both diseases reduce fruit weight and quality.
Early Blight (Alternaria)
Early blight is most widespread and is most destructive late in the season during fruit ripening. How-
ever, seedlings and transplants can also be affected and will develop stem cankers at or above the soil
line. If infected seedlings survive, their weakened stems often break as the stems grow and become
heavier. In late season infections, spots develop on older leaves. The fungus then spreads upward to
newer leaves. Defoliation of the plant greatly reduces the fruit harvest.
The characteristics of the leaf and fruit spots are important in identifying early blight. Usually you find
one or two spots, ¼ - ½ inch in diameter, circular or irregular in outline and having concentric lines in a
ring pattern within them. These spots often have a yellow halo surrounding them. Spots first appear on
older, lower leaves, progressing upward to the new growth.
Stem cankers are dark, slightly sunken, and may also exhibit a concentric ring pattern of lines. Fruit
spots at the stem end, ½ inch or more in diameter, are dark, leathery, and sunken and may have the ring
pattern of lines. Alternaria can be carried on the seed, but overwinters in the field in crop debris as well.
Septoria Leaf Spot (Septoria)
Septoria leaf spot is most evident after fruit set and affects older leaves first. It does not usually damage
seedlings, transplants or fruit.
The first symptoms are numerous, small (1/16 to 1/8 inch), water-soaked spots on leaves. The spots are
roughly circular with grey centers and dark margins and lack a yellow halo. Dark specks, which are
fruiting structures of the fungus, develop near the center of the spots. Similar spots may occur on stems,
blossoms, or fruit stems. Although fruit are very seldom infected, defoliation of the plants renders the
fruit susceptible to sunscald. Septoria overwinters in crop debris.
Tomato Leaf Spots
Family, Home & Garden Education Center
practical solutions to everyday questions
Toll free Info Line 1-877-398-4769
M-F • 9 AM - 2 PM
(over for chart)

Early Blight
Septoria Leaf Spot
Alternaria solani
Septoria lycopersici
Favored
High relative humidity
High rainfall
environment
Temperatures above 75EF
Temperatures 60-80EF
Symptoms
One or two spots per leaf 1/4 to
Numerous spots per leaf 1/16-1/8"
1/2 inch diameter. Spots have
with dark margins. Spots lack yellow halo
yellow halo and concentric ring
and have black specks in gray centers.
pattern of lines in tan centers.
Fruit spots on stem end, ½ inch
No fruit spots.
in diameter, dark, leathery,
sunken, with line pattern.
Stem cankers at or above soil line,
dark and sunken.
Prevention and
Select resistant varieties.
Same as for Early Blight. Apply overhead
non-chemical
Grow tomatoes in a different
water in morning to allow foliage to dry by
control
location in the garden each year.
evening.
Remove the lower leaves after
the first cluster of fruit has set.
Use mulch to prevent soil from splashing
Turn under all plant debris in fall.
up on leaves.
Chemical control
Purchase hot water and fungicide
Apply chlorothalonil, soon after transplant
treated seed. Apply chlorothalonil,
or at first cluster, and at 10 to 14 day
soon after transplant and at
intervals.
10 to 14 day intervals.
adapted from a fact sheet produced by the University of Massachusetts Cooperative Extension
written by William C. Woodbridge, Gary W. Moorman, Robert J. Precheur and George Hochmuth,
reviewed 10/00 by Dr. David Kopsell, UNH Cooperative Extension Vegetable Specialist
Visit our website: ceinfo.unh.edu
UNH Cooperative Extension programs and policies are consistent with pertinent Federal and State laws and regulations
on non-discrimination regarding age, color, handicap, national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, or veterans status.
Stop! Read the label on every pesticide container each time before using the material. Pesticides must be
applied only as directed on the label to be in compliance with the law. All pesticides listed in this publication
are contingent upon continued registration. Contact the Division of Pesticide Control at (603) 271-3550 to
check registration status. Dispose of empty containers safely, according to NH regulations.