Vegetables • HO-26-W 
Department of Horticulture 
Purdue University Cooperative Extension Service • West Lafayette, IN 
Tomatoes 
B. Rosie Lerner 
The tomato is the most popular vegetable in today’s home 
gardens, but it was not always so popular. Native to South 
America, the tomato was introduced by early explorers to 
Europe, where it became known as the “Apple of Love’’ in 
France and Italy. Thomas Jefferson raised tomatoes for 
his guests in 1781. However, it was not generally culti­
vated in the United States until 1835 because, until then, it 
was widely believed to be poisonous. 
Tomatoes are nutritious and low in calories. One medium-
sized tomato provides 57% of the recommended daily 
allotment (RDA) of vitamin C, 25% RDA vitamin A, and 
8% RDA iron, yet it has only 35 calories. Besides being 
eaten fresh, the versatile tomato can be baked, stewed, 
fried, juiced, or pickled and can be used in soups, salads, 
and sauces. 
Cultivars 
Tomatoes are available in a wide variety of shapes, sizes, 
and colors. While red tomatoes are the most common, 
yellow, orange, and pink tomatoes are sometimes grown. 
Tomatoes may be round, slightly flattened, or pear-like in 
shape. Sizes range from the bite-size cherry types to the 
giant beefsteak tomatoes. 
New cultivars appear on the market each year, expanding 
selection and improving disease resistance. The choice 
for your garden depends on how you will use the fruit. 
Most tomatoes can be used for fresh eating and cooking. 
However, the paste or Roma type tomatoes are best 
suited for cooking down into sauces and ketchup due to 
their lower water content. 
Some gardeners strive to produce the largest tomato on 
the block. Cultivars such as Beefsteak, Beefmaster, 
Ponderosa, and Oxheart are noted for their large fruit. 
However, these larger fruited types often are more 
susceptible to diseases and skin cracking. 
Others choose early-maturing cultivars to try to produce 
the first tomato of the season. Cultivars such as Early Girl, 
Early Boy, Fantastic, and Jetstar may be slightly less 
flavorful but will produce fruit 2-3 weeks earlier than mid-
or late-season cultivars. 
Tomato cultivars can be classified according to their 
growth habit. Determinate tomatoes are plants that grow 
to a height determined by their genetic makeup. When 
they reach their pre-determined height, they produce a 
cluster of flowers at the growing tip. The flowers along 
the stem of the plant tend to both open and set fruit within 
a couple of weeks time. Thus, determinate tomatoes are 
good choices for canning and sauce-making. 
Indeterminate tomatoes increase in height throughout the 
growing season because the terminal of the stem contin­
ues to produce foliar growth rather than set flowers. The 
flowers and thus fruits on these plants are produced 
continually through the season along the side shoots of 
the plant. Indeterminate tomatoes are the choice if you 
want to spread out the harvest over a longer period of 
time. 
Choose disease-resistant cultivars whenever possible. 
Many modern cultivars have resistance to Verticillium 
wilt, Fusarium wilt, and root knot nematodes. Cultivars 
with such resistance are denoted as such by the letters 
V, F, and N following the cultivar name. Consult your 
county office of the Purdue University Cooperative 
Extension Service for current cultivar recommendations. 
Soil Preparation 
Tomatoes will grow in many different soil types, but a 
deep, loamy, well-drained soil is ideal. Tomatoes grow 
best in a slightly acid soil with a pH of 6.2-6.8. 
Thoroughly prepare the soil by tilling or spading by hand. 
A soil test will indicate the proper level of fertilizer to 
apply to establish a healthy planting. In the absence of 
soil test recommendations, apply 2-3 pounds of a com­
plete fertilizer such as 5-10-5, 10-10-10, or 6-10-4 per 
100 square feet of garden area. Work the fertilizer in as 
you till or spade. Do not apply high nitrogen fertilizers 
such as those recommended for lawns. Excessive 
Reviewed 4/01 
Purdue University Cooperative Extension Service 
Page 1 of 5 

 
Vegetables • HO-26-W 
Figure 1. A properly caged tomato plant. 
nitrogen will promote luxurious foliage but will delay 
flowering and fruiting. 
Planting 
Tomatoes are most commonly transplanted rather than 
direct-seeded into the garden. You can grow your own 
transplants by starting the seed indoors. One advantage 
of growing your own transplants is the wider selection of 
cultivars available as seed through garden centers and 
mail-order houses. However, most homes do not provide 
good growing conditions for production of healthy trans­
plants. 
Most gardeners purchase their transplants from local 
sources. Look for short, stocky plants with dark green 
color and straight, sturdy stems about the size of a pencil 
or thicker. Avoid plants with yellowing leaves, spots, or 
other indications of insect, disease, or stress damage. 
Also avoid plants with flowers or fruits, because they will 
be slower to adapt to the garden environment. Early-
forming flowers should be removed to allow the plant to 
concentrate on foliage production first. 
Tomatoes are warm-season plants which do not tolerate 
frost or cold temperatures. Transplant to the garden after 
danger of frost is past and the soil has warmed: mid-late 
April in southern Indiana and mid-late May in northern 
Indiana. Cover plants if late frosts are forecast after 
tomatoes have been planted. 
Give the plants as much sunshine as possible (a mini­
mum of 6 hours direct sunlight) for optimum fruit produc­
tion. Do not plant near black walnut trees, because their 
roots produce a substance, juglone, which is toxic to 
tomatoes and some other plants. 
Space the plants 1-1/2 to 2 feet apart for small bush-type 
plants or larger plants that will be staked. Space larger 
plants 3 to 4 feet apart if unstaked. Allow 4 feet between 
the rows. 
Since tomatoes will root along the stem where in contact 
with soil, transplants can be set deeper in the garden 
than they were in the pot. However, the deeper the roots 
are planted, the less air is available, so it is best to plant 
as close to the original level as possible. 
Be sure to water the transplant thoroughly to establish 
good root/soil contact and prevent wilting. Watering in 
with a starter fertilizer solution will help get the roots off to 
a good start. Make your own starter solution by dissolving 
2 tablespoons of a high phosphorus fertilizer such as 6­
10-4 or 5-10-5. Newly set transplants may need to be 
shaded for the first week or so to prevent excessive 
drying of the leaves. 
Training 
Training tomatoes to grow upwards along a stake or in a 
cage has several advantages. Plants will have better air 
circulation to keep the leaves less susceptible to disease 
attack. Fruits will be held off of the soil, which helps 
prevent diseases. Plants can be spaced more closely to 
allow greater production. 
Caging 
Tomato plants can be supported on all sides by enclosing 
them in a wire cage. Caged tomatoes tend to be more 
productive, since suckers do not need to be removed. 
Caged tomatoes are also less prone to sunscalding injury 
because of greater foliage cover. 
Tomato cages can be purchased in several different 
sizes. Keep in mind the mature size of the tomato cultivar 
you are growing. The plants may start out small but will 
soon outgrow a small cage. As with stakes, it is best to 
set the cage in place at planting time. 
You can also construct your own cage using wire mesh 
such as concrete reinforcement wire. A cage which is 4­
1/2 feet in diameter and 4-5 feet tall will support most 
tomato cultivars. Make sure that the mesh is wide 
enough to allow your hand to reach in and harvest the 
fruit, preferably 6 x 6 inches. Hook the two cut ends of 
the mesh together to form a cylinder. Remove the bottom 
rung to form prongs that can be pushed into the ground 
for support. For additional protection from falling over, 
weave a stake in and out of the cage vertically until the 
stake reaches and sinks into the ground to a depth of 
about 1 foot. (See Figure 1.) 
Page 2 of 5 
Purdue University Cooperative Extension Service 
Reviewed 4/01 

Vegetables • HO-26-W 
Staking 
Stakes should be set in place at planting time to avoid 
later injury to roots. Use a sturdy pole at least 8 feet tall 
and 1 inch in diameter. Set the pole 1-2 feet deep and 
about 4 inches out from the plant. Use soft cord, strips of 
cloth, or strips of old nylon stockings to secure the tomato 
to the stake. To prevent injury to the plant’s stem from 
rubbing against the stake, tie the strips in a “figure 8,’’ 
with one loop loose around the stem and the other loop 
tight around the stake. 
To keep your tomato plant trained to the stake, it will be 
necessary to remove the suckers. These are the side 
branches that form in the axils of the plant, the points 
where the leaves join the stem. Check the plants weekly 
for sucker development, and pinch out the growing tip of 
the sucker just beyond the first two leaves on that 
branch. Allowing the first two leaves to remain will give 
the plant better foliage cover, which helps protect the 
fruits from sunscald. (See Figure 2.) 
Figure 2. A properly staked tomato plant. 
A.  A sturdy pole at least 8 feet tall should be placed 1-2 
feet deep and 4 inches out from the plant at the time 
of planting. 
B.  The tomato plant should be tied to the stake by 
fastening a soft cloth in a “figure 8,” one loop around 
the stake and the other around the stem. 
C.  Suckers should be removed by pinching just beyond 
the first two leaves. 
Summer Care 
Tomatoes need 1 to 1-1/2 inches of water per week to 
maintain plant health and good quality fruit. Applying a 
mulch will help conserve soil moisture by preventing 
evaporation and will help prevent extremes in the mois­
ture supply. 
Mulching will also help prevent weeds from germinating. 
Apply 2 -4 inches of organic mulch such as straw, hay, or 
bark chips after the soil has had a chance to warm up, 
usually by June. Or apply black plastic mulch just prior to 
planting. 
Where no mulch is used, cultivate shallowly to remove 
weeds while they are still small. Herbicides can be used 
in large tomato plantings but are not practical in the small 
garden with only a few plants of many different crops. 
A sidedressing of nitrogen fertilizer will help see the 
plants through the growing season. Apply 1 pound of 
ammonium nitrate (33-0-0) per 100 foot row at each of 
the following times: 
•  
1-2 weeks after first fruits are set, 
•  
2 weeks after picking first ripe fruit, and 
•  
6 weeks after picking first ripe fruit. 
Harvesting 
Both temperature and genetic makeup regulate the 
ripening and color development of tomatoes. The red 
color typical of most tomato cultivars does not form when 
temperatures are above 86°F, but yellow pigment contin­
ues to develop. Thus, tomatoes which ripen during hot 
weather are often yellowish-orange. 
Most gardeners like to wait until their tomatoes are “vine­
red ripe’’ before they pick them. Unfortunately, ripe 
tomatoes are more susceptible to sunscald and skin 
cracking, so it may be best to pick the fruits on the pink 
side and allow them to fully ripen off the plant. Place your 
harvest in a warm, shaded location or even in the dark to 
ripen them. Light is not necessary to further ripening. 
Pick off all remaining tomatoes, including the green ones, 
in the fall if a killing frost is forecast. The green tomatoes 
can be pickled or fried in the green stage. Most picked 
green tomatoes will ripen to a red color if placed in a 
dark, warm, 65-70°F location. Clean and dry the green 
tomatoes, and carefully remove the fruit stems. Place the 
tomatoes in single layers between sheets of newspaper. 
For longer storage, place in a cooler location but not 
under 55°F. Check the tomatoes periodically and remove 
any soft or decaying fruit. 
Reviewed 4/01 
Purdue University Cooperative Extension Service  
Page 3 of 5 

 
Vegetables • HO-26-W 
Another method is to leave the green tomatoes on the 
vine and pull up the vine itself, hanging it upside down in 
a cool area. Fruits can then be removed from the vine as 
they ripen. 
Problems 
Tomatoes are plagued by numerous problems which can 
often be prevented or controlled with proper cultural 
practices. 
Environmental Stress Disorders 
Blossom-end Rot appears as a dry, black, leathery scar 
on the blossom-end of the fruit. Caused by calcium 
deficiency, it is most often brought on by extremes in soil 
moisture and is most serious during hot dry spells. 
Mulching and irrigating during drought will help prevent 
moisture extremes. Staked and heavily pruned plants 
appear to be most susceptible. 
Blossom Drop is caused by temperature extremes. Fruit 
set occurs only when night temperatures are between 55 
and 75°F. When fruits are not set, blossoms fall off. 
Hormone sprays such as “Blossom-Set’’ may prevent 
some blossom drop due to low temperatures, but the 
resulting fruit is likely to be misshapen. These sprays are 
not effective when temperatures are too high. 
Fruit Cracks usually occur during hot rainy periods 
(above 90°F), especially when preceded by a long dry 
period. Fruits exposed to the sun are most susceptible. 
Radial cracking is most common, but concentric cracks 
also occur on some cultivars. 
Sunscald appears first as a yellow or white patch on the 
side of the fruit facing the sun. The spot may blister and 
dry, forming a paper-like surface. Poor foliage cover 
allows exposure to sun such as on pruned, staked 
tomatoes, sprawling plants, or unhealthy plants. Caging 
offers the best protection. 
Blotchy Ripening, the uneven development of color, may 
be due to temperatures below 60°F, root stress from 
compacted or soggy soil, or low levels of potassium in 
the soil. The fruits can still be used, simply cut away the 
poorly-colored areas. 
Poor Fruit Set is caused by extreme temperatures, dry 
soil, shading, or excessive nitrogen applications. 
Leaf Roll is characteristic of some cultivars and is nothing 
to be concerned about. Lower leaves roll up at the 
margins and take on a leathery texture. 
Catfacing is puckering and scarring at the blossom end of 
the fruit. Cavities may penetrate deep into the fruit. Cool 
and cloudy weather at blooming time may cause the 
blossom to stick to the young, developing fruit, resulting 
in the malformation. Damage from the herbicide 2, 4-D 
also will cause distortion. 
Puffiness occurs most frequently on early harvests. The 
outer walls of the fruit are normal, but the inside is hollow. 
Usually only one of the seed cavities will be empty. 
Extreme high or low temperatures which interfere with 
pollination, low light, excessive nitrogen, and heavy 
rainfall all contribute to this problem. No controls are 
known to be effective. 
Deformed Leaves, a weed killer injury, can be caused by 
even slight amounts of hormone-type herbicides such as 
2, 4-D. The injury results in curled, twisted leaves with 
light green, parallel veins on new growth. If severe, fruits 
may also be deformed. Plants usually return to normal 
after a period, but overall yield may be reduced. 
Cloudy Spots are irregular whitish spots just under the 
skin and are the result of stink bugs feeding. Controlling 
stink bugs will control the problem. 
Diseases 
Anthracnose, Early Blight, and Septoria Leaf Spot are the 
most commonly occurring diseases in Indiana gardens. 
They often begin as spots on either the leaves or fruits. 
Fusarium and Verticillium wilts are also quite common. 
The first symptom of wilt disease is a yellowing of the 
lower leaves, which then progresses upward through the 
plant. These two wilt diseases are very difficult to distin­
guish from each other and from walnut wilt. 
Choose resistant cultivars whenever possible to help 
prevent diseases from starting. Many fungicides are 
available to aid in preventing infection and controlling the 
spread of diseases if they do occur. Consult your county 
office of the Purdue Cooperative Extension Service. 
Insects 
Cutworms often cut off plants close to the soil surface, 
particularly early in the season. Setting a cardboard collar 
around the transplants at planting time will help prevent 
cutworm damage. 
Hornworms are large, 4-inch worms with a horn on one 
end, that eat foliage and fruit. Hand picking gives good 
control when numbers are small. 
Fruitworms eat holes in fruits and buds. Sprays are 
usually needed to prevent their injury. 
Stalk Borers tunnel in the stem, causing the plant to wilt 
and die. Removing nearby weeds will help destroy their 
breeding sites. 
Page 4 of 5 
Purdue University Cooperative Extension Service 
Reviewed 4/01 

                        
Vegetables • HO-26-W 
Flea Beetles are tiny, black jumping bugs which eat many 
tiny holes in the leaves. 
Leaf Miners tunnel inside the leaves, leaving tell-tale 
white, curly trails behind. 
Stink Bugs suck juices from the plant and often cause 
whitish spots to develop just below the skin of the fruit. 
Spider Mites are tiny, barely visible, and cause yellowish 
speckling on the foliage and very fine webbing. 
Many insecticides are available for control of insect 
pests. The choice of which chemical depends on the 
particular insect and crop. Consult your county office of 
the Purdue University Cooperative Extension Service. 
Canning 
Fear of botulism poisoning has been associated with 
home-canned tomatoes for many years, particularly with 
the new, so-called low-acid tomatoes. The acidity of a 
tomato does vary depending on location in the garden 
and degree of ripeness. However, the low-acid tomatoes 
are just as acidic as other tomatoes. They just have a 
higher sugar content, which makes them taste less 
acidic. Tests on numerous cultivars have shown that the 
acid content of the tested cultivars was high enough to 
prevent botulism when fruits are ripe. Use only firm, ripe 
tomatoes, and follow recommended procedures for safe 
canning. Do not use damaged, overripe fruits or those 
that have been stored at high temperatures. Consult your 
county office of the Purdue University Cooperative 
Extension Service for current canning recommendations. 
For more information on the subject discussed in this 
publication, consult your local office of the Purdue 
University Cooperative Extension Service. 
It is the policy of the Purdue University Cooperative Extension Service, David C. Petritz, Director, that all persons shall have equal opportunity and access to programs and facilities 
without regard to race, color, sex, religion, national origin, age, marital status, parental status, sexual orientation, or disability. Purdue University is an Affirmative Action employer. 
This material may be available in alternative formats. 
http://www.agcom.purdue.edu/AgCom/Pubs/menu.htm 
Reviewed 4/01 
Purdue University Cooperative Extension Service 
Page 5 of 5