
Pruning Tomato Plants
Becky Sideman, UNH Cooperative Extension Professor & Specialist
Why prune tomatoes? Pruning, or selectively removing some of the 
tomato plant growth, can improve harvestable yields and prolong 
the harvest season. Further, keeping tomato plants off the ground 
reduces common fungal diseases like early blight, Septoria leaf spot, 
and anthracnose, and improves fruit quality.
Tomato varieties are classified as having either determinate or 
indeterminate growth habit. The growth habit determines the most 
appropriate pruning system for that variety. Determinate tomatoes 
have a bush growth habit. These varieties stop growing once they set 
a terminal bud, usually when they are around 4’ tall. Determinate 
varieties are typically earlier than indeterminate varieties, but they 
have a short and defined production season. Indeterminate varieties 
keep growing indefinitely until frost, and continue to set new 
flowers and fruit throughout this time. Examples of varieties of each 
type are listed below.
Determinate Varieties 
Beefsteak type: Rutgers, Celebrity, Mountain Fresh, Florida 47, 
Orange Blossom
Plum type: Roma, Plum Dandy, San Marzano
Indeterminate Varieties
Cherry type: Sungold, Matt’s Wild Cherry,  Sweet 100
Grape type: Red Grape, Juliet
Beefsteak: Big Boy, Early Girl, Big Beef, Jet Star
Heirloom/Specialty: Brandywine, Black Krim, Cherokee Purple, 
Green Zebra
The two most common pruning systems in the Northeastern US are 
the basket weave and the overhead trellis systems. Both systems are 
described below.
Tomato varieties are classified as having 
determinate or indeterminate growth 
habit. The growth habit determines the 
most appropriate pruning system for 
that variety.
Bringing information and education into 
the communities of the Granite State
Cherry tomatoes

UNH Cooperative Extension • 2
Basket weave
The basket weave (sometimes called ‘Florida weave’) system uses about 
half as many stakes as individual staking, and also saves labor. This 
system is best suited to determinate varieties of tomatoes, but can be 
used for indeterminate varieties if the tops are trimmed once they reach 
the top of the stakes. 
•	
Use 4-5 ft sturdy wooden stakes, with double stakes at the end of 
each row for strength. If using indeterminate varieties, use 5’ stakes.
•	
Set stakes at least six inches deep, one stake for every two-three 
plants, as soon as the seedlings have been transplanted.
•	
Begin supporting tomato seedlings after they have set first flower 
clusters.
•	
Tie sturdy, untreated twine at one end of the row, about 12” up from 
the soil level. Weave twine in a figure eight pattern between tomato 
plants, wrapping twice around each stake down the row. After reaching 
the end stake, weave twine back up the row in the opposite direction, 
alternating with the first strand so each plant stem has a twine on both 
sides, holding it up.
•	
As plants grow, weave another layer of twine every 6-8 inches to 
keep plants well supported. Four layers of twine will support most 
varieties.

The basket weave is best 
suited to determinate vari­
eties, but can be used for 
indeterminate varieties if 
the tops are trimmed once 
they reach the  top of the 
stakes. 
D i d  Y o u  K n o w ?
Pruning system
Type of tomato
Location used
Basket weave
Determinate or 
Indeterminate 
(topped)
Outdoors or Tunnel/
Greenhouse
Overhead trellis
Indeterminate
Tunnel/Greenhouse or 
Outdoors (with sturdy 
trellis)
Basket weave system

UNH Cooperative Extension • 3
•	
Removing suckers (new shoots that develop in the leaf axils) 
reduces potential yields, but increases airflow. Leave the sucker just 
below the first flower cluster (remove all other suckers below that 
one), and allow all suckers above the first flower cluster to grow. 
•	
Indeterminate varieties will reach and exceed the top of the 
stakes. At that point, cut the tops off of indeterminate tomatoes to 
maintain a tidy hedge and to prevent the row from becoming top-
heavy.
Overhead trellis
The overhead trellis system is appropriate for indeterminate 
varieties. It is best suited to tomatoes grown indoors (e.g. in high 
tunnels), where overhead support infrastructure already exists. 
This system is more labor-intensive than the basket weave system, 
but it results in sustained yields over a longer period of time.
•	
Establish a strong overhead support at least 8’ above each row 
of tomatoes. This can be a heavy-gauge wire or metal conduit, 
but consider that each plant may weigh 30 lbs or more at peak 
fruit set, so be sure that it is secured firmly and can support this 
weight. If the tunnel frame is supporting the weight of the crop, it 
is important that it is strong enough to do this.
•	
Cut pieces of twine the length of the distance between the 
overhead support and the ground. If you intend to keep the 
tomatoes growing for several months, specialized rollers and hooks 
are available to hold a length of twine at the top of the support, 
so that you can increase the length of twine and lower the plants 
gradually as they grow.
•	
Begin supporting tomatoes once they have set the first flower 
clusters, or when they are at least 12” tall. Use a tomato clip to 
attach the twine to the tomato at the base of the plant without 
girdling the plant. 
•	
Trellised tomatoes can be trained to one or two leaders. One 
leader is most commonly recommended. If you are keeping one 
leader, remove all suckers (new shoots that develop in the leaf 
axils). If you are keeping two leaders, save the sucker just below 
the first flower cluster. Remove all other suckers. Remove suckers 
when they are still small (less than 2 inches).
•	
As the plant grows, use clips or ties to attach the tomato to the 
twine, as often as necessary as the plant grows, repositioning if 
needed. A plant will usually be well supported by clips placed every 
12-18” along the vine. Be sure to attach clips beneath a leaf rather 
than beneath a fruit cluster, to avoid damaging the cluster. If the 
twine is not too taut, another option is to wrap the plant around 
the twine as it grows, so the twine holds the plant up with fewer or 
no clips. 
Removing a sucker

UNH Cooperative Extension • 4
•	
Maintain good airflow by removing lower leaves. Keep the leaf just 
below the lowest cluster of fruit, and all leaves above that. 
•	
When the plant reaches the overhead support, the top can be 
removed to stop further growth, or the vine can be lowered to allow 
the plant to continue to grow. The “lean and lower” approach involves 
releasing more twine while moving the top twine away from the plant, 
which allows the plant to gently lean without breaking. 
Other resources:
To see the basket weave in action, watch this excellent University of 
Maine video. 
UNH Cooperative Extension brings information and education into the 
communities of the Granite State to help make New Hampshire’s individu­
als, businesses, and communities more successful and its natural resources 
healthy and productive. For 100 years, our specialists have been tailoring 
contemporary, practical education to regional needs, helping create a 
well-informed citizenry while strengthening key economic sectors.
The University of New Hampshire Cooperative Extension is an equal 
opportunity educator and employer. University of New Hampshire, 
U.S. Department of Agriculture and N.H. counties cooperating.
Visit our website: 
extension.unh.edu
For More Information
State Office
Taylor Hall
59 College Rd.
Durham, NH 03824
http://extension.unh.edu
Education Center and 
Information Line
answers@unh.edu
1-877-EXT-GROW 
(1-877-398-4769)
9 am–2 pm M–F
Search key words: 
“UNH Education Center”
About the Author
Dr. Becky Sideman is an 
Extension Professor in the Dept. 
of Biological Sciences at UNH, 
and is the state specialist for 
Sustainable Horticulture for 
UNH Cooperative Extension. 
Her program emphasizes 
vegetable and berry crop 
production including season 
extension for Northern New 
England.