Florinet Floriculture Newsletter - Tomato Mosaic Virus
 
Tomato Mosaic Virus
by Dr. S.G.P. Nameth
Dept. of Plant Pathology
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
There are a variety of plant viruses capable of causing severe economic
damage to greenhouse bedding and potted crops. In recent years impatiens
necrotic spot virus (INSV) has received much press and most growers are
relatively familiar with this virus. Recently, another very destructive virus has
become a problem in solanaceous crops such as petunia and Nicotiana. This
virus is tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). TMV is not a new virus, as a matter of
fact, it was the first plant virus to be identified and it is the most studied of
the hundreds of plant viruses known today. TMV has the potential to be very
destructive particularly if it escapes early detection in the host crop. Growers
need to know what types of symptoms to look for and more importantly what
to do with the infected plants and infested greenhouse after TMV has been
confirmed.
 
The Pathogen
As mentioned TMV has been studied in great detail and researchers have
accumulated a great deal of information on it's genetics and biology. TMV,
like all plant viruses, is submicroscopic and can only be visualized with an
electron microscope. The host range for TMV is very large with genera in
hundreds of plant families being susceptible to infection. Many of the
commonly-grown greenhouse bedding plants are susceptible to TMV
infection. Hosts such as petunia, Nicotiana, impatiens and vegetable
transplants such as tomato and pepper are all highly susceptible. The primary
way that TMV moves from plant to plant is via mechanical transmission. This
means by physically handling infected plants with ones hands, pruning
implements or watering wands, TMV can spread from plant to plant. Unlike
most other viruses, insects are not of major concern when dealing with TMV.
 
Symptoms associated with infection
In order to identify TMV as soon as possible it is important that the grower
be able to recognize the symptoms associated in an infected host. Symptoms
may vary from host to host, however, there are a few common symptoms the
TMV induces in its host. One of the most common symptoms associated with

Florinet Floriculture Newsletter - Tomato Mosaic Virus
TMV infection is leaf mosaic and flower break. Leaf mosaic is usually
accompanied with leaf distortion which can range from mild distortion to
severe distortion. In most cases the infected plants are stunted and may be
yellow. Ringspots on the leafs that are commonly associated with INSV
infection are not normally seen in plants infected with TMV.
 
Control
The best way to control TMV is through prevention. Growers need to do their
best to keep the virus out of the greenhouse. Once in the greenhouse the virus
becomes established very quickly and it takes a great deal of effort to
reestablish a virus-free facility.  If plant material is to be started from seed, it
is imperative that growers purchase seed from a producer that can assure the
seed is free of viral pathogens. The cheaper the seed the more likely the seed
will be pathogen-infested. If plants are to be started from cuttings, the cuttings
should be certified virus-free. Most cutting producers go to great lengths to
make sure the mother stock from which the cuttings are produced is free of all
pathogens. If any pre-finished material is brought into the greenhouse it
should be examined carefully for symptoms and if suspect, it should be tested
for TMV. Also, any pre-finished plant material should be quarantined and
randomly tested prior to mixing it in with the rest of the greenhouse.
 
What if I find TMV in my greenhouse?
If TMV is identified in your greenhouse actions need to be taken immediately
in order to keep the virus from spreading throughout the entire greenhouse.
Infected material needs to be removed from the greenhouse and destroyed.
Employees that are handling the infected plants will need to wash their hands
prior to reentering the greenhouse. If at all possible workers need to wear
gloves when handling infected plants. Even clothing that comes in contact
with infected plants has the potential to move the virus from plant to plant.
This virus spreads from plant to plant easier than any other plant virus.
 
Plants within the immediate area of the infected plants need to be tested
regularly for evidence of TMV. Weekly testing for at least four weeks is
necessary to determine the health of the plant. If plants test negative for TMV
for four weeks they are probably not infected.
 
All surfaces where the TMV-infected plants were sitting or surfaces to which
infected material has come in contact should be washed-down with a surface
disinfestant such as GreenShield, Physan, Zerotol or TSP (trisodium
phosphate). TMV has the capability to survive outside the host plant on
surfaces for an extended period of time. This surface disinfesting should be
carried out routinely throughout the remainder of the growing season. Once
the greenhouse is empty, the entire facility should be sprayed down with a
disinfestant before any new plant material enters the facility for the following
growing season.
 
TMV should be taken very seriously and no corners should be cut to remove

Florinet Floriculture Newsletter - Tomato Mosaic Virus
it from the production facility.