T
Both early blight and Septoria 
leaf spot are potentially serious dis-
eases that affect the leaves, stems, 
and fruit of tomatoes. Early blight, 
caused by the fungus Alternaria solani, 
can also infect eggplant. Septoria leaf 
spot is caused by Septoria lycopersici 
and can infect ground cherries, jim-
sonweed, and nightshade as well. 
Both diseases thrive during periods 
of moderate temperatures and abun-
dant rainfall. They may occur on 
plants of any age, but they usually 
become evident after the plants begin 
to set fruit.
Symptoms and effects 
Early blight is primarily a 
foliage disease, but may also cause 
fruit to rot near the stem in late fall. 
Symptoms of early blight first appear 
on older leaves and are characterized 
by irregularly shaped brown spots 
with concentric rings. Usually the 
tissue surrounding each spot turns 
yellow. The spots enlarge to 
1/4–1/2 inch in diameter and coalesce, 
causing the leaf to turn brown and 
drop. As the plant loses its leaves, the 
fruit become exposed to the sun and 
susceptible to sunscald. Infected fruit 
have dark, leathery, sunken spots 
near the stem end. Only green fruit 
are infected.
Septoria leaf spot is first notice-
able by the small, circular spots on 
the upper surface of the lower leaves. 
There is often a corresponding water-
soaked spot on the lower leaf surface. 
These spots are smaller and more 
numerous than those of early blight. 
They are 1/16–1/4 inch in diameter 
and have a tan or light-colored center. 
Tiny black fruiting bodies may be 
found in the center of these lesions. 
Infected leaves may drop from the 
plant. Spotting of the stem and blos-
soms may also occur. 
Both diseases can be identified 
with reasonable accuracy in the field. 
Laboratory examination, if necessary, 
will confirm the field diagnosis. For 
more information about submitting 
a specimen, consult your county 
Extension office. 
 omato disorders: 
Early blight and Septoria leaf spot
A2606
 K A R E N  D E L A H A U T  a n d  W A L T  S T E V E N S O N
Tomato
Early blight on tomato. Note the 
yellow halos surrounding large, 
irregularly shaped lesions.
To identify the diseases in the field, look at the size and shape of the 
spots: Large, irregular spots and yellowing leaves are indicative of early 
blight; Septoria leaf spot causes small, round spots with light centers.
Early blight
Septoria leaf spot

Copyright © 2004 by the Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System doing business as the division of 
Cooperative Extension of the University of Wisconsin-Extension. All rights reserved. Send copyright inquiries to: Manager, 
Cooperative Extension Publishing, 432 N. Lake St., Rm. 103, Madison, WI 53706.
Authors: Karen Delahaut is senior outreach specialist with the fresh market vegetable program, Walt Stevenson is professor 
of plant pathology, College of Agricultural and Life Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison and University of Wisconsin-
Extension, Cooperative Extension. Produced by Cooperative Extension Publications, University of Wisconsin-Extension.
University of Wisconsin-Extension, Cooperative Extension, an EEO/AA employer, provides equal opportunities in 
employment and programming, including Title IX and American with Disabilities (ADA) requirements. 
This publication is available from your Wisconsin county Extension office or from Cooperative Extension Publishing. 
To order, call toll-free: 1-877-947-7827 (WIS-PUBS ) or visit our web site: cecommerce.uwex.edu. 
A2606 Tomato Disorders: Early Blight and Septoria Leaf Spot 
R-05-04
 T O M A T O  D I S O R D E R S :  E A R L Y  B L I G H T  A N D  S E P T O R I A  L E A F  S P O T
Disease cycle
The early blight pathogen over-
winters on infected plant debris 
where it can survive for 1 year, on 
seed, or in the soil. Septoria can 
survive for up to 3 years in infested 
debris, but it can also survive on 
weedy hosts such as jimsonweed, 
horsenettle, groundcherry, and night-
shade. Initial infection occurs on the 
lower leaves and spreads upward 
in the plant as spores from infected 
leaves are splashed onto clean foliage 
by rain or irrigation water. Spores can 
also be spread if field work occurs 
while plants are wet. 
Control 
Rotate out of solanaceous 
(tomato family) crops for 3–4 years 
and control solanaceous weeds such 
as jimsonweed, horsenettle, ground-
cherry, and nightshade to reduce the 
build up of spores of both diseases 
in the soil. Use disease-free seed and 
inspect purchased transplants for leaf 
spots before transplanting into the 
field. 
Select a well-drained site with 
good exposure to the sun and wind 
to promote drying of the foliage after 
rain or dew. Space plants far enough 
apart to allow good air movement. 
Staking or caging plants also helps 
speed drying of plants after wetting 
and keeps fruit and leaves off the soil. 
Do not water late in the day unless 
you are using trickle irrigation. Mulch 
will act as a barrier between the soil 
and foliage to prevent spores from 
splashing onto the leaves and fruit.
Carefully monitor plants weekly 
once they begin to flower for early 
symptoms of these diseases. Pruning 
and destroying the lowest leaves will 
improve air circulation and hasten 
drying of the foliage after wetting. 
Removing leaves at the first sign 
of infection will also help slow the 
spread of the disease. 
At the end of the season remove 
or thoroughly incorporate all crop 
refuse. If the remains are buried 
deeply and decay, the fungi have 
less chance of overwintering. Do 
not compost infected vines unless 
you practice stringent composting 
practices that will assure prolonged 
heating to kill the disease organisms. 
There are presently no tomato 
varieties resistant to Septoria leaf 
spot. A few tomato varieties are 
reported to be tolerant to early blight, 
but they have not proven to perform 
well in Wisconsin. 
It may be necessary to treat 
tomatoes with protectant fungicides 
to control Septoria and early blight. 
Begin treatment when the first fruit 
clusters start to develop or when the 
first symptoms are observed. Some 
growers find that a few well-timed 
sprays control the diseases while 
other growers treat more frequently 
and still find that control is difficult. 
Applications of fungicide may be 
needed every 7–10 days when the 
weather is wet and warm. Observe 
the new foliage regularly to be sure 
that the sprays are effective.