Extension Bulletin E3170 • May 2012
msue.anr.msu.edu/program/info/mi_fresh
Tomato
Diseases in the 
Home Garden
Written by:
Gretchen Voyle, 
MSU Extension educator
Lawn or garden questions?
Visit migarden.msu.edu.
Call toll-free 1-888-678-3464.  
T
omatoes are one of 
the top three favorite 
vegetables grown in home 
gardens. Tomatoes are the 
most delicious when they 
are grown and picked at 
peak ripeness from your 
garden. But there is more 
involved than just planting 
and harvesting.
Four common diseases can 
ruin the tomato fruit or kill 
the plants or do both. They are all caused by different kinds 
of fungi. Fungal diseases cannot be cured once they have 
begun, but they can be successfully prevented. The best 
news is that all these diseases can be controlled by the same 
fungicides. The timing of protective fungicides for these 
diseases is also the same.
Depending on the weather and the year, one disease may 
be more severe than another. All fungal diseases depend 
on some form of moisture on the plants to enable the 
diseases to develop. It could be rain, high humidity, fog or 
leaves getting wet from 
overhead irrigation — 
especially if watering 
occurs late in the day 
or in the evening when 
plants could stay wet 
overnight — that gives 
fungi a foothold.
Septoria leaf spot
This is one of the most 
common diseases of 
tomatoes in Michigan. 
This disease can kill 
the plant but does not 
damage the fruit. 
Leaves: Septoria begins on the lowest leaves on the plant. 
Small, dark spots are the first sign. Then the spots develop 
yellow halos. Leaves turn yellow, then brown, and dry 
before falling off. The disease spreads from lower leaves 
upward on the plant.
Fruit: The fruit is not damaged by the disease, but it may 
become sunburned from lack of leaves.
Weather: Usually hot and humid.
Early blight
The fungus that causes this disease overwinters in 
plant debris and seeds. Diseased plant material must be 
destroyed. Plant and fruit will exhibit damage.
Early blight

Tomato Diseases in the Home Garden
Leaves: Dark spots appear first on older leaves and develop 
a bull’s-eye appearance as they enlarge. With many lesions, 
leaves turn yellow and fall off. Dark lesions can occur on 
stems.
Fruit: Infection usually occurs at the stem end of the fruit, 
causing dark brown, leathery spots with concentric rings. 
Infected small fruit fall off. In humid weather, fruit can be 
covered with a black, velvety coat of spores.
Weather: Humid or rainy; cool weather (less than 70 
degrees F) or warm weather (75 to 85 degrees).
Late blight
This is one of the most devastating and rapidly developing 
tomato diseases, but it occurs sporadically.
Leaves: The first sign is pale green to brown spots on the 
leaves, often with a purplish cast. Spots enlarge, turn dark 
brown to purple-black, and the leaves shrivel and die. 
Often, pale yellow or green halos encircle the enlarging 
lesions. Lesions on stems grow rapidly and kill the stem. 
Plants die within several days. Decaying plants have an 
unpleasant odor.
Fruit: Rotting often begins near the stem. Gray-green to 
brown, irregularly shaped spots appear and rapidly grow. 
The rotted portion is leathery and uneven.
Weather: Cool and moist. Potatoes can also be infected by 
this fungus.
Anthracnose
This disease causes rotting of ripe fruit. It can also cause 
high mold counts if diseased tomatoes are canned. Anthrac-
nose is often not as common as the other three diseases.
Leaves: The leaves are not damaged.
Fruit: Early symptoms are small, slightly depressed, water-
soaked round spots. Spots enlarge, become more sunken 
and develop concentric rings. There may be tiny, black 
spots within the lesions. Spots can run together, and large 
rotten areas may appear.
Weather: Anthacnose can happen under a wide range of 
weather conditions, but some moisture is necessary. The 
disease may follow damage from a hailstorm or blowing 
sand that damages the skin of the fruit.
CONTROL
It is important to use a recommended fungicide to prevent 
these fungal diseases. To successfully prevent them, begin 
spraying when the first tiny fruit appear. Repeat once a 
week or follow label directions.
Keep in mind that overhead watering or rain will wash 
off the applied protective fungicides. They will have to be 
reapplied or the protection is lost.
Chemical
ingredient
Possible brand
name (maker)
Conventional
fungicides
Chlorothalonil
Vegetable Disease
Control (Ortho)
Daconil (Ortho)
Fungonil (Bonide)
Captan
Orthocide (Ortho)
Organic
fungicides
Biological — 
bacterium
(Agraquest) Serenade
Sulfur
Various brand names
IMPORTANT: Fungicides are preventive — once the 
leaves or fruit are showing spots or are incubating a 
fungus, fungicides cannot cure them.
When using pesticides, read and follow all label 
directions.
Use of chemical names does not imply endorsement 
of these products by MSU Extension.
Find out more about Michigan Fresh at 
msue.anr.msu.edu/program/info/mi_fresh.
MSU is an affirmative-action, equal-opportunity employer, committed to achieving excellence 
through a diverse workforce and inclusive culture that encourages all people to reach their 
full potential. Michigan State University Extension programs and materials are open to all 
without regard to race, color, national origin, gender, gender identity, religion, age, height, 
weight, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, marital status, family status or veteran 
status. Issued in furtherance of MSU Extension work, acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, in 
cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Thomas G. Coon, Director, MSU 
Extension, East Lansing, MI 48824. This information is for educational purposes only. 
Reference to commercial products or trade names does not imply endorsement by MSU 
Extension or bias against those not mentioned.