Tomato Leaf and Fruit Diseases and Disorders
Megan Kennelly, Plant Pathologist
Kansas State University Agricultural Experiment Station and Cooperative Extension Service
Plant Pathology 	
L721
Septoria Leaf Spot and Early Blight
The fungal diseases Septoria leaf spot and early blight 
are two of the most common tomato 
diseases. Both diseases can occur 
anytime during the growing season, 
but they generally become more severe 
after blossom-set. These diseases result 
in the formation of leaf spots that typ-
ically develop first on the older leaves 
nearest the ground. During favorable 
conditions for disease development, 
these diseases can cause extensive 
defoliation, resulting in sunscalding of 
fruit and reduction in yield.
Septoria leaf spot and early blight 
have similarities, but they can be distin-
guished from one another in the field. 
In Kansas, Septoria tends to be 
more common than early blight. 
Symptoms of Septoria leaf spot first 
appear as small, water-soaked spots 
on the lower leaves. Infection moves 
up the plant as the season progresses. 
The leaf spots (lesions) generally are 
smaller and more numerous than spots 
resulting from early blight. Eventually 
the center portion of the Septoria 
lesion turns light tan or gray, while 
the margin remains dark. Small black 
fruiting structures (pycnidia) of the 
fungus, readily visible with a 10X hand 
lens, form in the center portion of the 
lesion (Figure 1). Heavily infected 
leaves may scorch and wilt, giving the 
plant the appearance of a wilt disease.
Early blight causes irregular, brown 
leaf spots (lesions) that range in size 
up to ½ inch in diameter. The most 
important diagnostic feature of early 
blight is the formation of dark, concentric rings within the 
lesion, giving the spots a targetlike appearance (Figure 2). 
Often, several lesions coalesce, 
causing the leaf to turn yellow, 
dry up, and fall off the plant. 
Defoliation weakens the plant 
and exposes the fruit to sunscald 
injury. Although early blight is 
primarily a foliage disease, lesions 
may develop on both stems and 
fruit. Fruit lesions are tan to brown, 
leathery, and typically originate at 
the stem end of the fruit.
Cause
Septoria Leaf Spot: Septoria 
lycopersici
Early Blight: Alternaria solani
Both fungi survive the winter 
in plant debris, on seeds, or on 
weeds such as nightshade and 
horse nettle. In the spring and 
summer, spores of these fungi can 
be splashed or blown to tomato 
leaves. Relatively warm tempera-
tures, abundant rainfall, and high 
relative humidity favor disease 
development.
Control
Sanitation measures in the fall 
reduce the amount of inoculum 
available for infection the follow-
ing year. In the fall, deep plow 
tomato plots to bury tomato debris, 
or remove and destroy dead plants. 
Avoid planting tomatoes in the 
same area of the garden year after 
Several tomato diseases and disorders cause leaf spots and fruit rots. Typically, these diseases do not kill the plants, 
but they can lead to significant yield and quality losses. Many disease-causing microorganisms can survive in plant debris, 
on seed, or in the soil. Proper sanitation is one of the best ways to prevent or reduce losses. Gardeners should remove all 
tomato debris in the fall and avoid planting tomatoes in the same area year after year. This publication discusses some of 
the major leaf spot and fruit diseases and physiological disorders in Kansas. The first section describes fungal diseases, the 
second section describes bacterial diseases, and the third section describes physiological disorders.
Figure 1. Septoria leaf spot lesions often have 
small black specks (fungal spore-producing 
structures). Photo courtesy Wendy Johnson, 
Kansas State University.
Figure 2. Early blight lesions on tomato 
leaves usually have a target-like appearance. 
Photo courtesy Clemson University - USDA 
Cooperative Extension Slide Series, Bugwood.org.
Fungal Diseases

year. Clean seed and healthy transplants in the spring help 
control the disease. To reduce humidity and leaf wetness, 
avoid overhead irrigation. To improve airflow, use staking 
and appropriate plant spacing. To prevent rain splash, use 
mulch. Avoid composting diseased plant material.
Start with the cultural practices described above. However, 
there are control materials available. For best results, begin 
applications as soon as the symptoms become apparent. 
Homeowners can refer to Table 1. Commercial growers 
should consult the Midwest Vegetable Production Guide for 
Commercial Growers; a management guide published every 
year. Contact your local K-State Research and Extension 
Office or the K-State Plant Diagnostic Lab for ordering 
information.
Anthracnose
Anthracnose is a frequent problem in the latter part of 
the growing season on ripening tomato fruit. The disease 
results in a fruit rot that reduces the quality and yield of 
tomatoes. Symptoms of anthracnose appear first as small, 
circular, slightly sunken lesions on the surface of ripening 
fruits. The spots quickly enlarge, become bruiselike depres-
sions, and develop a water-soaked appearance directly 
beneath the skin (epidermis) of the fruit. Black, concentric 
rings form in the center of the lesions. The rings consist of 
numerous small fruiting structures (acervuli) of the disease-
causing fungus (Figure 3).
During humid weather, masses of buff-colored fungal 
spores (conidia) are extruded from the fruiting structure. 
Several lesions coalesce, causing extensive decay of the fruit. 
Eventually, secondary microorganisms invade the lesions and 
cause a complete rotting of the fruit.
Cause
Anthracnose is caused by several fungal species in the 
genus Colletotrichum, including C. coccodes, C. dematium, and 
C. gloeosporioides.
The fungus can survive in infected plant debris and 
in the soil. During 
rainy weather, fungal 
spores are splashed 
onto the fruit. Most 
infection takes place 
on ripe or overripe 
fruit. Green fruit 
also can be infected, 
although symptoms 
do not develop until 
the tomatoes begin 
to mature. Disease 
development is 
favored by frequent 
rainfall temperatures 
around 80 degrees 
Fahrenheit.
Control
Several cultural practices help reduce the incidence of 
anthracnose. Mulching around the tomato plants prevents 
splashing of spores from the soil onto the fruits. Staking 
tomatoes increases air movement and decreases the likeli-
hood of favorable environmental conditions for infection. 
Avoid overhead watering and remove infected or rotting 
fruits from the plant. 
Start with the cultural practices described above. 
However, there are control materials available.
Homeowners can refer to Table 1. Commercial growers 
should consult the Midwest Vegetable Production Guide for 
Commercial Growers; a management guide published every 
year. Contact your local K-State Research and Extension 
Office or the K-State Plant Diagnostic Lab for ordering 
information.
Table 1. Homeowner fungicides labeled for Septoria leaf spot, early blight and anthracnose of tomato.
Active ingredient
Example products*
Notes
Bacillus subtilis
 (biological control 
organism)
Serenade Garden Disease 
Control
The bacterial species Bacillus subtilis has had 
efficacy in trials for some fungi, but not in others. 
Little data available for tomato diseases.
chlorothalonil
Fertilome Broad Spectrum 
Fungicide, Ortho Garden 
Disease Control, Garden Tech 
Daconil Fungicide Concentrate
In trials with commercial formulations of 
chlorothalonil, fungicides have reduced disease 
compared to untreated controls.
copper
Natural Guard Copper Soap 
Liquid Fungicide
Performance of copper materials has been good 
in several trials for Septoria and early blight, but 
poor in several others.
maneb
Hi-Yield Maneb Garden 
Fungicide
In trials with commercial formulations of a 
related material called mancozeb, fungicides have 
reduced disease compared to untreated controls.
* Labels change frequently, and it is the responsibility of the user to follow all label instructions.
Figure 3. Anthracnose causes circular, sunken areas 
on ripening fruit which later support numerous fungal 
spore-producing structures (black specks). Photo courtesy 
Clemson University - USDA Cooperative Extension 
Slide Series, Bugwood.org

Bacterial Speck and Spot
In average Kansas summers, bacterial speck and bacte-
rial spot of tomato are not common, but they can cause 
serious damage during wet growing seasons. On tomatoes, 
both diseases result in spot formation on the leaves and 
fruit. Heavy infection can cause defoliation, but the main 
effect of these diseases is the reduction of fruit quality.
Leaf symptoms of bacterial speck and bacterial spot 
are similar. Both diseases cause small (⅛ to ¼ inch) black 
lesions on leaves. These spots usually are surrounded by 
a yellow halo. The lesions of bacterial spot tend to have a 
greasy appearance; those of bacterial speck do not. The two 
diseases are more easily distinguished by symptoms on the 
fruit. Bacterial spot results in small, black, slightly raised, 
water-soaked spots. These spots may enlarge to ¼ inch in 
diameter and become very rough and cracked. Bacterial 
speck lesions also are slightly raised, but typically are much 
smaller (1/16 inch) than those of bacterial spot. Bacterial 
speck lesions do not crack or become scaly as in bacterial 
spot (Figures 4 and 5). 
Cause
Bacterial Speck Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato
Bacterial Spot Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria
Both bacteria can survive the winter on plant debris or 
on other weedy hosts. The bacteria also can be introduced 
into a field on contaminated seed or infected transplants. 
Driving rain and mechanical injury to plants caused by hail 
and high winds increase the severity of these diseases. The 
development of bacterial speck is favored by relatively cool 
(65 to 75 degree Fahrenheit), wet conditions, while bacte-
rial spot becomes more severe during periods of warmer 
temperatures (75 to 85 degree Fahrenheit), heavy rainfall, 
and high relative humidity.
Control
Control measures for the two diseases are similar. 
Removing plant debris in the fall, cultivation of weeds, 
rotation, and the use of clean (noninfested) seed and trans-
plants reduces the severity of or prevents these diseases. To 
reduce humidity and leaf wetness, avoid overhead irriga-
tion. Use staking and appropriate plant spacing to improve 
airflow. Use mulch to prevent rain splash. Do not work in 
the tomato planting when plants are wet.
Start with the cultural practices described above. 
There are several copper-based compounds available for 
homeowners, but chemical control of bacterial diseases 
is inconsistent. Bacteria have extremely fast reproductive 
times, and it is difficult to manage an epidemic once it is 
underway. If you use a chemical, read and follow all label 
instructions. 
Commercial growers should consult the Midwest 
Vegetable Production Guide for Commercial Growers; a 
management guide published every year. Contact your local 
K-State Research and Extension Office or the K-State 
Plant Diagnostic Lab for ordering information.
Bacterial Canker
Bacterial canker, a third bacterial disease, can be a 
serious problem in commercial and small garden tomato 
plantings. This disease can cause lesions or cankers on any 
portion of the plant, including the fruit, or it can result in 
a general wilt or decline of the plant. Diseased tomatoes 
first exhibit yellowing and wilting of leaves on a portion of 
Kansas State University Agricultural Experiment Station and Cooperative Extension Service
BACTERIAL DISEASES
Figure 4. Bacterial speck causes tiny black lesions on fruit. 
Photo courtesy Christine Smart, Cornell University.
Figure 5. Bacterial spot causes lesions up to ¼ inch that are 
often rough or cracked in appearance. Photo courtesy Mary 
Ann Hansen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University, Bugwood.org.
Tomato Leaf and Fruit Diseases and Disorders

the plant. The leaves eventually become brittle and dry, and 
drop from the plant. Yellowish streaks may develop on leaf 
petioles, stems, and also internally in the water-conducting 
tissue of the main stem. Rotting in the stem may be visible 
when stems are cut (Figure 6). In addition, small circular 
depressed areas called cankers may form on the stem. 
The most diagnostic feature of bacterial canker is the 
formation of fruit spots. These spots may be confused with 
those caused by bacterial speck or spot. However, fruit 
lesions caused by bacterial canker are bordered by a distinct 
white halo (Figure 7). These white halos may disappear as 
the fruit ripens.
Cause
Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. michiganensis
The bacterium can be introduced into fields on con-
taminated seed or on infected transplants. The bacterium 
also can survive in soil on infested plant material for at 
least 1 year. During the growing season, the small bacteria 
are dispersed by water (irrigation or rain) and infect plants 
through wounds or natural openings. Once inside the plant, 
the organism can invade the water-conducting tissue and 
be carried systemically throughout the plant.
Figure 6. Bacterial canker can cause a rotting in the stem, 
visible as discoloration when the stem is cut. Photo courtesy 
Paul Bachi, University of Kentucky Research & Education 
Center, Bugwood.org.
Figure 7. Bacterial canker lesions on fruit usually have a 
white halo. Photo courtesy Mary Ann Hansen, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University, Bugwood.org.
Disease development is favored by moderately high 
temperatures (75 to 85 degrees Fahrenheit) and wet, humid 
conditions.
Control
The most important means of controlling bacterial 
canker is using clean seed from a reputable firm and trans-
planting into disease-free soil. If you have an outbreak of 
bacterial canker, do not plant tomatoes or other crops in the 
tomato family (pepper, eggplant, potatoes) into that bed for 
at least 3 years. Avoid overhead irrigation, which spreads 
bacteria and allows infection to occur. Avoid working with 
plants under wet conditions. Sanitize tools such as pruning 
shears. Use mulch to prevent rain splash.
Start with the cultural practices described above. 
Copper materials are available but are generally not 
effective. 
Commercial growers should consult the Midwest 
Vegetable Production Guide for Commercial Growers; a 
management guide published every year. Contact your local 
K-State Research and Extension Office or the K-State 
Plant Diagnostic Lab for ordering information.

Blossom End Rot
Fruits develop a sunken, water-soaked lesion near the 
blossom end. The lesion expands rapidly, turns black, and 
results in a flattening of the end of the fruit (Figure 8). 
Secondary organisms frequently invade the lesions and 
cause a complete rotting of the fruit. The disorder com-
monly occurs during periods of hot, dry weather.
Cause: Physiological
Blossom end rot is a physiological disorder (not an 
infectious disease) resulting from a shortage of available 
calcium in rapidly developing fruit. This problem can 
occur even though the soil has an abundance of calcium. 
The disorder is associated with rapid plant growth and 
quick fluctuations in soil moisture. In Kansas, the disease 
is typically most severe during periods of hot daytime 
temperatures, low humidity, and windy conditions. The 
disease also is more serious when excess nitrogen fertilizer 
has been applied.
Control
Providing even and adequate soil moisture, especially 
during fruit set, can reduce the incidence of blossom 
end rot. More uniform soil moisture can be achieved by 
mulching and a balanced irrigation program. Avoid over-
fertilization of the plant with nitrogen, especially of the 
ammonia formulation. Select cultivars that are less prone to 
blossom end rot.
Leaf Roll
During mild spring weather, top growth is more 
vigorous than root growth. When drier summer weather 
occurs, the abundant foliage transpires water faster than the 
root system absorbs it. The plant compensates by rolling 
its leaves to reduce surface area (Fig. 9). The leaves may 
become thickened. The symptoms may occur after cultiva-
tion, heavy rains, or a sudden change in weather. 
Control
The condition is temporary and the plant will recover 
on its own. To prevent leaf roll, keep soil evenly moist (not 
too wet, not too dry) and avoid cultivation that damages 
roots.
Growth Cracks
Growth cracking occurs on tomato fruit that expand 
too quickly. It is most common on nearly ripe fruit, but it 
can occur on younger fruit. Cracks develop in concentric 
circles around the stem scar (Figure 10). They also can 
PHYSIOLOGICAL DISORDERS
Figure 8. Blossom end rot causes sunken, water soaked 
lesions that eventually turn black. Photo courtesy David B. 
Langston, University of Georgia, Bugwood.org.
Figure 9. Physiological leaf roll. Photo courtesy Ward 
Upham, KSU Horticulture
Figure 10. Concentric growth cracks. Photo courtesy Paul 
Bachi, University of Kentucky.
Kansas State University Agricultural Experiment Station and Cooperative Extension Service
Tomato Leaf and Fruit Diseases and Disorders

Kansas State University Agricultural Experiment Station and Cooperative Extension Service
L721	
May 2009
K-State Research and Extension is an equal opportunity provider and employer. Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension Work, Acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, 
as amended. Kansas State University, County Extension Councils, Extension Districts, and United States Department of Agriculture Cooperating, John D. Floros, Director.
Brand names appearing in this publication are for product identification purposes only. No endorsement is intended, nor is criticism implied of similar 
products not mentioned. Persons using such products assume responsibility for their use in accordance with current label directions of the manufacturer.
Publications from Kansas State University are available at: www.bookstore.ksre.ksu.edu
Contents of this publication may be freely reproduced for educational purposes. All other rights reserved. In each case, 
credit Megan Kennelly, Tomato Leaf and Fruit Diseases and Disorders, Kansas State University, May 2009.
occur as radial cracking that spreads in a starlike pattern 
from the stem scar toward the blossom end (Figure 11).
Cause: Physiological
Growth cracks occur when the fruit expands and 
stretches the epidermis (skin) beyond its capacity (Figure 
10). Excessive moisture, fluctuations in temperature, and an 
overabundance of nitrogen can cause cracking. In addi-
tion, tomato fruits exposed to sunlight are more prone to 
cracking.
Control
Select cultivars less prone to cracking. Provide even 
water and balanced nutrition to avoid overly lush growth. 
Limit fruit exposure to sun through proper staking or trel-
lising, and by managing foliar diseases. 
References:
Caldwell, B., Rosen, E. B., Sideman, E., Shelton, A., and 
Smart, C. 2005. Resource guide for organic insect and 
disease management. New York State Agricultural 
Experiment Station, Geneva NY.
Jones, J.B., Jones, J. P., Stall, R. E., and Zitter, T. A. 1991. 
Compendium of Tomato Diseases. The American 
Phytopathological Society, St. Paul MN.
Midwest Vegetable Production Guide for Commercial 
Growers, 2008. Available online at: www.btny.purdue.
edu/Pubs/ID-56
Raudales, R. E. and McSpadden-Gardener, B. B. 2008. 
Microbial biopesticides for the control of plant diseases 
in organic farming. The Ohio State University, publica-
tion HYG-3310-08. Available online at: ohioline.osu.
edu/hyg-fact/3000/pdf/HYG_3310_08.pdf
Figure 11. Radial growth cracks. Photo courtesy Meg 
Williamson, Clemson University.