Tomato Late Blight
Identification and Management
A4052-01
L
ate blight is a plant disease that 
affects a variety of Solanum spp., 
including eggplant, pepper, 
nightshade weeds, and petunia. 
However, it is most infamously 
known for its destruction of potato, 
S. tuberosum, and tomato, S. 
lycopersicum.
Symptoms
Symptoms of late blight may be found 
on any above-ground part of the 
tomato plant. Infected leaves typically 
have green to brown patches of dead 
tissue surrounded by a pale green 
or gray border. When the weather 
is very humid and wet, late blight 
infections can appear water-soaked 
or dark brown in color, and are often 
described as appearing greasy. White, 
fuzzy growth may be found on the 
undersides of leaves or on lower stems. 
Stem and petiole lesions are brown 
and are typically not well defined in 
shape. Discoloration may also occur on 
the flowers, causing them to drop.
Symptomatic tomato fruits appear 
mottled, often with golden to dark 
brown, firm, sunken surfaces. White, 
fuzzy pathogen growth can also be 
found in association with the fruit 
lesions.
Amanda Gevens and Jaime Wilbur
Tomato leaf late blight lesions can be round to irregular 
in shape and may have a brown dry center with pale 
green halo when conditions are dry.
Ripe tomato showing late blight symptoms of firm, 
sunken lesions. Some lesions are dark brown, and others 
are golden (above) and show rings of pathogen growth.
Whole tomato plants defoliated due to late blight infection. Note 
fruit hanging on plants despite loss of vines and stems.

T O M A T O  L A T E  B L I G H T
Disease spread 
and conditions
Phytophthora infestans is the 
oomycete, or water mold pathogen, 
responsible for tomato late blight. 
In the United States, this fungus-like 
organism overwinters primarily in 
plant debris as mycelia, a filamentous, 
thread-like growth of the pathogen. In 
some countries of Europe and South 
America, the pathogen can produce 
a soil-persistent spore known as the 
oospore, but this spore has not been 
identified in the United States. The 
pathogen spreads by movement of 
asexual spores: sporangia (airborne 
spores) and zoospores (water-
swimming spores). The pathogen 
invades host plant cells causing plant 
death.
The production of pathogen spores 
is promoted by moist conditions 
(90–100% relative humidity) with 
moderate temperatures (60–80˚F). 
Sporangia may germinate at 64–75˚F, 
and zoospores are released at 46–64˚F. 
Mycelia prefer temperatures around 
73˚F for optimal growth.
Disease cycle
Phytophthora infestans reproduces 
asexually (via sporangia and 
zoospores). In warm weather, 
sporangia land on susceptible host 
tissue and directly germinate to create 
an infection. In cooler wet weather, 
however, sporangia produce motile 
zoospores that can infect host tissues. 
After just 4–5 days of sufficient 
moisture and moderate temperatures, 
a new phase of sporulation can occur 
at the site of the initial infection. New 
sporangia are then carried by wind 
and splashed water to new plant 
tissue, creating new infections. And 
the disease spreads. Continued and 
rapid repetition of this asexual disease 
cycle causes large-scale and fast-
advancing late blight epidemics.
Management
Strategies for managing late blight 
in tomato include planting resistant 
cultivars, eliminating volunteers 
(tomato plants that have re-seeded 
from the previous year’s crop), spacing 
plants to increase airflow and reduce 
humidity, and applying preventive and 
effective fungicides to avoid infection.
Various fungicides are registered for 
use in controlling tomato late blight. 
Some categories of fungicides are 
appropriate in conventional systems, 
and others are appropriate in organic 
systems. For either production system 
type, it is critical to apply fungicides 
before initial infection for best control 
of late blight.
Commercial producers in Wisconsin 
have adopted use of Blitecast. This 
disease-forecasting tool indicates 
appropriate timing for preventive 
fungicide applications based on 
favorable weather. This tool can aid 
in reducing the need for multiple, 
calendar-based fungicide applications 
prior to actual disease risk. For further 
information and access to Blitecast 
information, please refer to the 
University of Wisconsin Vegetable 
Pathology website (www.plantpath.
wisc.edu/wivegdis/). For Wisconsin-
specific fungicide recommendations, 
please refer to Commercial Vegetable 
Production in Wisconsin (A3422), a 
guide available through the UW-
Extension Learning Store website 
(learningstore.uwex.edu).
Underside of tomato leaf showing typical late blight lesions under 
relatively dry conditions. Lesions are brown and papery with rings of 
white, fuzzy pathogen sporulation. Sporulation typically occurs on 
plants not receiving direct sunlight.

I D E N T I F I C A T I O N  &  M A N A G E M E N T
Note A1 and A2 mating type interaction at bottom of figure. The U.S. does not currently have this phase of the disease cycle, 
but in some parts of the world, the pathogen will mate and produce a soilborne spore (oospore).
Tomato Late Blight Disease Cycle

T O M A T O  L A T E  B L I G H T
For more information
USAblight
www.usablight.org
This national late blight reporting and 
information website also provides 
useful statewide disease occurrence, 
management information, and alerts.
University of Wisconsin Vegetable 
Pathology website
www.plantpath.wisc.edu/wivegdis/
Commercial Vegetable Production in 
Wisconsin (A3422)
learningstore.uwex.edu
Your local Extension office
In Wisconsin: 
yourcountyextensionoffice.org
	
Outside of Wisconsin: 
www.csrees.usda.gov/Extension
Copyright © 2014 by the Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System doing business as the division of Cooperative Extension of 
the University of Wisconsin-Extension. All rights reserved.
Authors: Amanda Gevens is assistant professor and Jaime Wilbur is graduate research assistant of plant pathology, College of Agricultural and 
Life Sciences, University of Wisconsin–Madison. Gevens holds a joint appointment with the University of Wisconsin–Extension, Cooperative 
Extension. Cooperative Extension publications are subject to peer review.
University of Wisconsin-Extension, Cooperative Extension, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture and Wisconsin counties, 
publishes this information to further the purpose of the May 8 and June 30, 1914, Acts of Congress. An EEO/AA employer, the University of 
Wisconsin-Extension, Cooperative Extension provides equal opportunities in employment and programming, including Title IX and ADA 
requirements. If you have a disability and require this information in an alternative format, or if you would like to submit a copyright request, 
please contact Cooperative Extension Publishing at 432 N. Lake St., Rm. 227, Madison, WI 53706; pubs@uwex.edu; or (608) 263-2770 (711 for 
Relay).
This publication is available from your county UW-Extension office (yourcountyextensionoffice.org) or from Cooperative Extension 
Publishing. To order, call toll-free 1-877-947-7827 or visit our website at learningstore.uwex.edu.
Tomato Late Blight: Identification & Management (A4052-01)
I-1-2015