717-1 
 
CMG GardenNotes #717 
Growing Tomatoes 
 
 
Outline:  Variety Selection, page 1 
Planting, page 2 
Mulching, page 5 
Irrigation, page 5 
Fertilization, page 5 
Pollination and Summer Temperatures, page 6 
Garden Sanitation, page 6 
Common Disorders, page 7 
Ripening Fruit at the End of the Season, page 7 
 
 
 
Variety Selection 
 
There are over 10,000 cultivars of tomatoes grown worldwide. Ask neighbors, local gardeners, and 
garden center staff about local favorites and choose cultivars that suit you best. 
 
Hybrid tomatoes are popular in the United States because of breeding efforts to reduce problems 
with common soil-borne pathogens like early blight, tomato spotted wilt virus, Verticillium wilt, and 
Fusarium wilts. Early hybrids were developed for their yields and disease resistance. Flavor became 
a driving factor in the breeding of newer hybrids. Some gardeners prefer to trade off the disease 
protection of hybrids for the  desired flavors of heirloom varieties. 
 
For early production, Early Girl is a popular  cultivar with mid-size fruits. Celebrity, Big Boy, and 
Better Boy are examples of popular main season  cultivars. Many gardeners prefer the rich tomato 
flavor of heirloom Brandywine or the large beefsteak types. Pear tomatoes as well as yellow and 
green types are gaining popularity. Cherry and grape-type tomatoes are popular for salads and 
snacking. Many, but not all, have small size vines suitable for container gardening. [Figure 1]  
 
Requiring less time to cook down, paste types such as Roma and its descendants are preferred for 
making salsa, chili sauce, and other tomato products. Be aware that paste types and standard 
varieties are not directly interchangeable in recipes. 
 
Where the growing season is short, select Early Girl and other cultivars that will mature in 50 days or 
less. In many mountain communities, tomatoes may only be successfully grown in a structure or 
adjacent to the south side of a building to provide frost protection and warmer growing temperatures. 
 
Whatever  tomato you prefer, VFN resistant hybrids  are recommended. The abbreviation VFN 
indicates resistance to Verticillium wilt, Fusarium wilt, and nematodes. Verticillium and Fusarium 
wilts are common soil-borne fungal diseases. Nematodes are not an issue in Colorado due to cold 
soil temperatures. Researchers have found multiple strains of Verticillium and Fusarium, so if you 
are having problems with these diseases, try other VFN varieties. 

717-2 
 
Figure 1. Sweet 100 is the most popular home garden cherry-type tomato. On 
a large vine, it produces hundreds of sweet, cherry sized fruits with very tender 
skins. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There are three types of vine tomatoes: indeterminant and determinant, and a newer semi-
determinant. Most popular home garden  cultivars are indeterminant. With indeterminant tomatoes,  
flower and fruit production continues through the growing season, extending  harvests until frost kills 
the vine. Plant size is typically large. Determinant types are common in commercial production as 
vine growth stops when flowering begins; plants will typically be moderate in size. Determinant types 
put on a large single crop. They may be suitable for container planting where trellises are not 
possible. Semi-determinant plants will continue to grow and put out several flushes of growth and 
may be a good choice for smaller gardens where the grower wants a larger harvest than 
determinant plants provide.  
 
Planting  
 
Planting Time 
 
For optimal growing, tomatoes need warm temperatures: above 52ºF at night and above 60ºF during 
the day at transplant. They are readily killed by a light frost. A week of cool daytime temperatures 
(below 55ºF) will stunt plants, reducing yields. Soil temperatures are also important, soil 
temperatures must be above 55 ºF before transplant can be successful.  
 
With these warm temperature requirements, planting time along the Colorado Front Range is 
typically late May. Do not plant tomatoes out into a cold spell and make sure soil temperatures are 
warm. To get a head start on the season, gardeners use a variety of frost protection techniques. The 
Wall-of-Water provides protection against mild frost. Cool soil temperatures also inhibit early 
growth. In addition to Wall-of-Water, black plastic mulch can be used to help warm the soil. [Figure 
2] Cool soil temperatures are also a growth-limiting factor with early plantings.  

717-3 
 
Figure 2. Wall-of-Water protecting tomato plants. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Selecting the Ideal Plants 
 
The ideal tomato transplant is dark grass green and six to eight inches tall with at least 5-7 true 
leaves. The stem is about pencil size in diameter and the plant has not been pruned or cut back. 
Transplants are hardened-off (growth rate slows so the plant is more tolerant of the move the 
greenhouse environment to the bright, windy outdoors) by withholding water and/or nutrients and by 
exposure to cooler temperatures. Avoid purchasing any plants with flowers or fruit or remove if 
necessary.  
 
Plant leggy transplants horizontally – When gardeners are shopping for transplants in the warm 
greenhouse conditions of May, tomato plants quickly grow from ideal size to tall and leggy, and 
white bumps along the leggy tomato stem are roots begin to form.  
 
Plant these taller leggy transplants horizontally. Dig a trench a two to three inches deep. Place the 
plant horizontal with only the top two to three sets of leaves showing above the soil. Pinch off other 
lower leaves below the soil line before planting. These leggy plants readily root out along the stem in 
the warm soil near the surface, supporting rapid growth. [Figure 3] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Space and Trellis Plants 
 
To minimize early blight, space and trellis plants to allow for good air circulation and promote rapid 
drying. Trellised tomatoes are easier to pick and less preferred by tomato psyllid insects. Trellising 
Figure 3. Plant tall leggy tomatoes horizontal in a shallow furrow. 

717-4 
 
eliminates problems with fruit rotting where they touch the ground. The minimal spacing for trellised 
tomatoes is two feet apart in a hedgerow. Research has demonstrated that crowding plants will not 
increase yields but will increase disease problems. 
 
Cages  
 
The American Society for Horticultural Science suggests a trellis two feet in diameter by four to five 
feet tall. It is easy to make from a 6½-foot length of concrete reinforcing mesh. Cut off the bottom 
ring of wire so the cages can be pushed into the ground. When a branch sticks out of the cage, 
simple tuck it back in. [Figure 4] 
 
For the smaller-vined, determinant types, two cages may be made from a 6½-foot length, cutting the 
height in half. Cages will be two feet diameter but only 3 feet tall. Commercially available cages are 
too small for most popular tomato varieties grown on good soils. Cages are six feet around, two feet 
across, and five feet tall. On improved soils, tomato vines will loosely fill the cage, allowing for good 
air circulation and easy picking. 
 
Tomatoes are rather sensitive to cool winds. Wrapping the cages with a plastic sheet or newspapers 
to provide wind protection for the first week helps plants acclimate. [Figure 5] 
Figure 4. Tomatoes planted in a raised bed with 
black plastic mulch and cages. 
Figure 5. A tomato cage wrapped with plastic. 
 
 
Fan Trellis  
 
Another method, which produces larger fruit, is to 
trellis to a three-trunk, fan shape, removing all other 
side shoots. This requires a sturdy frame to support 
the weight of the vine and fruit. [Figure 6] 
 
Single Pole Trellises 
 
Some gardeners prefer to trellis tomatoes on a single 
pole or stake. To do this, prune plants to a single 
trunk by removing all side shoots. This requires 
constant removal of side shoots. [Figure 7] 
 
Figure 6. Tomatoes trellised into a fan shape. 

717-5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mulching 
 
As with any crop, surface mulch is recommended to conserve soil moisture and manage weeds. 
Mulching helps reduce the splashing of early blight fungal spores from the soil onto the leaves. It 
also helps stabilize soil moisture levels, reducing the incidence of blossom end rot. 
 
Black plastic mulch is popular for tomatoes, warming the soil and pushing production two to three 
weeks earlier. When using black plastic mulch, crops must be planted early so plant growth covers 
and shades the plastic before summer heat sets in. 
 
Irrigation 
 
Avoid overhead  irrigation on tomatoes. Fungal spores are easily water-splashed from one leaf to 
another, and water on the leaves creates a favorable environment for disease development. 
Watering in the morning, allowing plants to dry before nighttime, may also be helpful. 
 
Fertilization 
 
Tomatoes have a moderate nitrogen requirement. Under high nitrogen conditions, vines grow 
excessively large at the expense of fruit production. More correctly stated, tomatoes are a fussy 
nitrogen feeder. On soils low in organic matter, tomatoes typically run out of nitrogen in mid-summer, 
reducing yields and predisposing the plants to early blight. At transplanting, apply one to three 
applications (depending on soil organic content) of a water-soluble, “plant starter” fertilizer. 
Transplants would have been “hardened off” (growth slowed) in the greenhouse. Water-soluble 
fertilizers stimulate renewed growth. 
 
If the weather turns cold late spring after tomatoes are out (that is, a week with daytime 
temperatures below 55ºF), use water-soluble fertilizers to stimulate growth when warm temperatures 
return. A week with daytime temperatures below 55 ºF stunts tomato growth, reducing yields. 
On low organic matter soils, tomatoes typically run out of nitrogen in mid to late summer. Yellowing 
of the foliage, starting with lower leaves, is the typical symptom of nitrogen stress. Low nitrogen 
results in a plant more susceptible to  early blight disease. Keeping nitrogen levels up in mid to late 
summer is a primary means of early blight control and significantly improves yields. 
Figure 7. Tomatoes trellised to single poles. 

717-6 
 
Fertilize tomatoes lightly as the first fruits reach two inches in diameter. Water-soluble fertilizers  
used according to label directions make a good summer fertilizer supplement. Apply every 2 to 4 
weeks, depending on soil organic content. 
 
If using a dry granular fertilizer, apply 21-0-0 (ammonium sulfate) at the rate of one level tablespoon 
per plant. Sprinkle the granular fertilizer in a wide circle 12 to 20 inches out from the plant, and water 
in. Dry granular fertilizers can easily kill tomatoes if over-applied. 
 
Pollination and Summer Temperatures 
 
Tomato pollination is temperature dependent. If nighttime temperatures drop below 55ºF, pollen fails 
to develop and flowers that open the following morning will not set fruit. Cool nights often interfere 
with fruit set for early tomatoes and in higher elevations. Blossom set sprays help set fruit even with 
cool nights. 
 
If the daytime temperature reaches 90ºF by 10 a.m., blossoms that opened that morning abort. 
Blossom set sprays are not effective under high temperatures. Shading tomatoes can help retain 
more bloom, use a 30% shade reduction shade cloth.  
 
In July and August along the Colorado Front Range, night temperatures have a 50/50 probability of 
staying above 55ºF any given night. In unusually warm seasons, tomato fruit set may be unusually 
high. When poor soil conditions and/or watering problems limit plant growth potential, fruit may ripen 
while small. With good soil  and water conditions, fruit size may be unusually large. 
 
Garden Sanitation 
 
Weed Control 
 
Common weeds harbor many garden insect and 
disease problems. Volunteer potatoes and 
tomatoes could be a source of early blight 
infection. [Figure 8] 
 
For early blight management, some references 
suggest removing lower leaves showing 
symptoms. Symptoms start as tiny black spots on 
lower leaves. Spots enlarge to light and dark 
target-like rings. Leaves are yellow and the 
disease progresses from lower leaves up the plant.  
 
If removing lower leaves, focus on leaves with the 
tiny black spots. Removing just the lower yellow 
leaves will not be adequate. Wash hands with soap 
and water immediately after touching diseased 
leaves to prevent spreading spores to other plants. 
Avoid working with the plants when they are wet. 
 
Another disease, tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) can 
readily spread from tobacco smoke residues on the 
hands and clothing to tomatoes. Prevent TMV 
infections by washing hands after smoking or 
handling tobacco products.  
 
Figure 8. Early blight leaf spots. [Photo: USDA] 

717-7 
 
Rotation 
 
Since the common tomato diseases (early blight, Verticillium and Fusarium wilt) are soil borne, crop 
rotation is an effective management tool. However, this may not be practical in most home garden 
situations, particularly since rotation allows no tomatoes, peppers, potatoes, eggplants, vine crops 
(cucumbers, squash, pumpkins, and melons), strawberries, or raspberries in the same growing area 
for at least four years. In a garden bed, moving the tomatoes a few rows to the left or right is not an 
effective rotation. 
 
Fall Clean Up 
 
Remove all tomato and potato debris in the fall. Dispose of debris in municipal trash or by burial. Do 
not compost unless the compost heats to at least 145ºF and the pile is turned occasionally. Most 
home compost piles do not heat adequately to kill pathogens. 
 
Common Disorders 
 
Tomatoes are prone to many problems including insects, diseases, and abiotic disorders. Common 
problems include phosphorous deficiency, curly top virus, psyllids, flea beetles, hornworms, early 
blight, septoria leaf blight, aphids, whiteflies, fusarium wilt, verticillium wilt, blossom end rot, cat 
facing, and sun scald. For more information about common disorders of tomato plants, see CSU 
Extension Fact Sheet #2.949, Recognizing Tomato Problems. 
 
Ripening Fruit at the End of the Season 
 
To speed fruit ripening in the fall, hold back slightly on watering.  
 
Ripening Fruit Indoors   
 
With the forecast of a light frost (28-32 ºF), tomatoes may be protected by covering. If heavy frost 
(below 28 ºF) is forecast and covering is not practical, harvest fruit before the frost event. 
 
Pick ripening fruit and green tomatoes with a glossy green appearance that have reached about 
three-fourths of their full size. Remove stems. Wash fruit under a stream of water and allow to air dry 
on a clean towel.  Save only blemish-free fruits for ripening indoors. 
 
As for humidity, fruit shrivel if it is too low. If the humidity is too high, fruit mold. A gardener will have 
to learn by trial and error what works for their home. Some gardeners simply hang the whole plant 
upside down in a dark cool barn or basement to let the fruits ripen gradually. In Colorado’s dry 
climate, fruit tend to shrivel from the low humidity. 
 
Other options include placing tomatoes, one or two layers deep, in a covered box for ripening. Some 
people find better success by individually wrapping fruit in newspaper or wax paper and placing 
them in a covered box. Placing a few fruit together in a vegetable storage bag has been effective for 
others. To increase humidity, place tomatoes up to two layers deep in a blanching pan or strainer 
inside of a covered pan with some water in the bottom. Make sure the fruit does not touch the water. 
 
Ethylene gas produced by ripening tomatoes is a ripening hormone. To speed the ripening process, 
place a ripe tomato in the container with the fruit. To slow the ripening of green tomatoes, routinely 
remove ripening fruit from the container. Green fruit will ripen in about two weeks at 65ºF to 70ºF, 
and in about three to four weeks at 55ºF. Storage below 50ºF will give fruit a bland, off-flavor. Ripe 
tomatoes may be stored in the refrigerator for a few days.  
 

717-8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Authors: David Whiting (CSU Extension, retired), with Carol O’Meara (CSU Extension, Boulder County), and Carl Wilson 
(CSU Extension, retired). Artwork by David Whiting; used by permission. Reviewed October 2024 by Cassey Anderson 
and Chris Hilgert.  
 
• 
Colorado Master Gardener GardenNotes are available online at https://cmg.extension.colostate.edu/. 
• 
No endorsement is intended of products mentioned, nor is criticism implied of products not mentioned. 
• 
Copyright Colorado State University Extension. All Rights Reserved. CMG GardenNotes may be reproduced, 
without change or additions, for nonprofit educational use with attribution. 
• 
Colorado State University, U.S. Department of Agriculture, and cooperating Colorado counties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://col.st/0WMJA 
 
Reviewed October 2024 
Colorado State University Extension is an 
equal opportunity provider. 
 
Colorado State University does not 
discriminate on the basis of disability and is 
committed to providing reasonable 
accommodations. 
 
CSU’s Office of Engagement and Extension 
ensures meaningful access and equal 
opportunities to participate to individuals 
whose first language is not English. 
Colorado State University Extension es un 
proveedor que ofrece igualdad de oportunidades. 
 
Colorado State University no discrimina por 
motivos de discapacidad y se compromete a 
proporcionar adaptaciones razonables. 
 
Office of Engagement and Extension de CSU 
garantiza acceso significativo e igualdad de 
oportunidades para participar a las personas 
quienes su primer idioma no es el inglés.