Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Craig R. Andersen 
Associate Professor and 
Extension Specialist ­
Vegetables 
Arkansas Is  
Our Campus  
Visit our web site at: 
https://www.uaex.uada.edu
Home Gardening Series 
Tomatoes 
Environment 
Light – sunny 
Soil – well-drained loam 
Fertility – medium-rich 
pH – 5.8 to 7.2 
Temperature – warm 
Moisture – moist 
Culture 
Planting – transplant after danger of 
frost or midsummer 
Spacing – 18-24 x 48-72 inches 
Hardiness – tender, frost sensitive 
Fertilizer – heavy feeder 
Tomatoes – Lycopersicon 
esculentum - Perennial 
Tomatoes belong to a group of 
plants in the nightshade family. Its 
edible relatives include Irish potatoes, 
eggplant, peppers and tomatillos. 
Tomatoes originated in the Peru-
Ecuador area and spread northward 
in pre-Columbian times to Mexico, 
where they were first domesticated. 
Spanish explorers carried the plants 
to southern Europe, where they were 
first eaten, before being utilized by 
the people of northern Europe and the 
United States. For many years, they 
were considered poisonous and were 
grown only for ornamental purposes 
under the names “tomatl,” “love 
apple” or “pomme d’amour.” The name 
tomate, or tomata, was adapted from 
the Aztec word tomatl. Early tomatoes 
were remarkably similar to those 
grown today. 
Tomatoes are easy to grow. A few 
plants provide an adequate harvest 
for most families. The tomato plant is 
FSA6017  
a tender, warm-season perennial that 
is handled like an annual in summer 
and fall gardens. 
Today, 95 percent of all American 
gardeners grow tomatoes; they are the 
most popular garden vegetable in 
Arkansas. According to the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, four out of 
five people prefer tomatoes to any 
other homegrown food. Tomatoes rank 
number one in terms of their contribu­
tion of nutrients to the American diet, 
simply because we eat a lot of them. 
Cultural Practices 
Cultivars 
Hundreds of cultivars of tomatoes 
are now available for the home 
gardener. They range widely in size, 
shape, color, plant type, disease resis­
tance and seasons of maturity. Cata­
logs, garden centers, Web sites and 
greenhouses offer a large selection of 
tomato cultivars, and selecting the 
best one or two cultivars can be 
extremely difficult. Choose the culti­
vars best suited for your intended use 
and method of culture. Small-fruited 
University of Arkansas, United States Department of Agriculture, and County Governments Cooperating 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Cultivars 
Crop 
Cultivar 
Days to 
Maturity 
Plants Per 
100 Feet 
of Row 
Disease 
Resistance 
or Tolerance 
Remarks 
Red 
Tomatoes 
Better Boy 
72 
50 
F, V, RKN 
Globe-shaped fruit, vigorous plant growth with 
good production, indeterminate vine. 
Celebrity 
70 
50 
V, F, TMV, N 
AAS winner, crack resistant, determinate vine, 
large firm fruit. 
Mountain Pride 
77 
50 
F, V 
Hybrid, determinate vine, deep red fruit, crack 
resistant. 
Big Beef 
80 
50 
F, V 
AAS winner, indeterminate fruit up to 2 pounds. 
Outstanding taste. 
Pink 
Tomatoes 
BradleyAR 
75 
50 
F 
Smooth pink fruit, crack resistant, indeterminate 
vine. 
Pink Brandywine 
78 
50 
Deep pink skin, red flesh, indeterminate. One of 
the best-tasting tomatoes. 
Arkansas Traveler 76AR 
76 
50 
Crack-free, 6 to 8 ounces. Pink fruit are mild 
and juicy. 
Paste 
Tomatoes 
Viva Italia 
80 
50 
Determinate plants produce lots of red, 3-ounce, 
paste-type fruit. Great fresh or cooked. 
Plum Dandy 
82 
50 
EB, F1, V 
Roma tomatoes, compact, determinate plants, 
red fruit, good fresh or cooked. 
Yellow 
Lemon Boy 
72 
50 
Seven-ounce lemon-yellow fruit with mild flavor, 
very productive hybrid. 
Patio/ 
Container 
Types 
Husky Red, Gold and 
Pink Cherry 
65 
50 
Hybrid, dwarf, indeterminate, good container/patio 
type. 
Lizzano 
50 
LB 
AAS winner. Semi-determinate with a low growing 
habit for containers and uniform growth habit. 
Small 
Fruited 
Large Red Cherry 
72 
50 
Good quality, small, round fruit, indeterminate 
vine. 
Super Sweet 100 
50 
Dependable production. 
Juliet 
65 
50 
AAS winner, grape tomato clusters of sweet fruit. 
Abbreviations: EB: Early Blight; LB: Late Blight; F: Fusarium Wilt; N: Nematodes; RKN: Root-Knot Nematode; TMV: Tobacco Mosaic Virus; 
V: Verticillium Wilt. (R): Resistant; (T): Tolerant; AAS: All-America Selections® 
cultivars, such as cherry tomatoes, set fruit during 
periods of high temperature that limit fruit produc­
tion of the large-fruited types. Container and patio 
cultivars are popular where space is limited. Their 
ornamental value is considered as important as fruit 
quality. They have red or golden fruit and are not 
suitable for pruning. Many heirloom tomato cultivars 
such as Brandywine, Oxheart and Marmande are 
readily available as seeds or plants. It is always fun 
to try one or two of these and rediscover tomatoes 
from our past. 
Planting Time 
Transplanting tomatoes gives them the best start. 
Start plants five to six weeks before the first frost-free 
date in your region. Some gardeners transplant toma­
toes soon after the soil is prepared for spring garden­
ing when there is a high risk of damage from freezing. 
Be prepared to cover early-set plants overnight to 
protect them from frost. There are many different 
ways to protect young tomato plants. Some of these 
methods include hot caps, floating row covers and 
water-filled plastic cones. For best results, plant 
when the soil is warm, soon after the frost-free date. 
Plant development, not the age of the plant, 
determines when tomatoes bear fruit. 
Late plantings may be made in early July for fall 
harvest and storage. These plants have the advantage 
of increased vigor and freedom from early diseases. 
They often produce better-quality tomatoes than a 
late picking from the spring planting. Time late plant­
ing for maximum yield before a killing frost arrives in 
your region (about 100 days from transplanting for 
most varieties). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spacing of Plants 
Spacing depends upon the variety and method of 
culture. Space dwarf plants 12 inches apart in the 
row, staked plants 18 to 24 inches apart and wire-
caged or groundbed plants 24 to 36 inches apart. 
Place rows 48 to 72 inches apart. 
Care 
Prior to planting, fertilize with a complete 
fertilizer at the rate of 1 pound per 100 square feet of 
row. Apply 8 ounces of a starter fertilizer solution 
(1 tablespoon of 20-20-20 per gallon) when transplant­
ing. Hoe or cultivate shallowly to keep down weeds 
without damaging roots. If you wish to maintain your 
plants for full-season harvest, consider mulching with 
black plastic or organic materials. 
Water the plants thoroughly every two to four 
days during dry periods. Plants in containers need 
daily watering. Side-dress with nitrogen fertilizer at 
the rate of 1 pound per 100 feet of row or 1 table­
spoon per plant after the first tomatoes have grown 
to the size of golf balls. Make two more applications 
three and six weeks later. If the weather is dry 
following these applications, water the plants 
thoroughly. Do not get fertilizer on the leaves. 
Staking and Pruning Methods 
Many gardeners train their tomato plants to 
stakes, trellises or cages with great success. Wire 
cages placed over small tomato plants hold the vines 
and fruit off the ground. Short cages (3 feet high) 
usually support themselves when the wire prongs at 
the bottom are pushed into the ground. Taller cages 
require a stake, post or wire for support. Large mesh 
(6 x 6 inch) wire permits easy harvesting. Tomato 
plants must be tied to supporting stakes or to a trellis 
because they do not support themselves with tendrils, 
unlike cucumber plants. Loop ordinary soft twine, 
cord or cloth loosely around the main stem and tie it 
tightly to the stake. Tying the stems too tightly 
injures them. All varieties are not equally suitable for 
staking and pruning. 
Staking involves pruning the plant to either one 
or two main stems. Tomatoes grown without support 
develop a bush shape. The small suckers that develop 
between the axil of the leaf and the stem are removed 
to develop a vine structure rather than a bush. Drive 
a wooden stake (1-inch diameter and 6 feet long) into 
the ground beside the plant and allow it to be loosely 
attached to the stake as it grows. Do not damage the 
root system when inserting the stake in the ground. 
Attach the plant to the stake with twist-ties, soft 
string, strips of cloth or nylon hosiery. The plant is 
sufficiently supported if it is attached to the stake at 
12- to 14-inch intervals. Continue to remove suckers 
to prevent the plant from developing more than one 
or two central stems. 
Prune staked or caged tomato plants to stimulate 
early fruit maturity. Be sure your cultivar is suitable 
for pruning. To prune the plant properly, remove the 
shoots (suckers) when they are 1 to 2 inches long. The 
shoots develop in the axil of each leaf (the angle 
between the leaf petiole and the stem above it). Pinch 
the shoots off by hand rather than cut them. 
Prune the plants every five to seven days. Be 
careful not to prune the developing flower clusters 
that grow from the main stem or to pinch off the 
growing tip (terminal) of the plant. Remember, the 
more severely you prune the foliage, the more you 
limit plant growth (including root development). 
Double-stem or multiple-stem pruning systems 
sacrifice some earliness and fruit size for less risk of 
cracking, blossom-end rot and sunburn. Do not prune 
cherry tomatoes. 
Determinate cultivars stop growing after five to 
seven clusters of fruit have developed. This type 
requires less pruning than the indeterminate culti­
vars. The determinate vine has a repeating pattern of 
two leaves followed by a fruiting cluster, while the 
indeterminate vine has a repeating pattern of three 
or four leaves and a fruiting cluster. The indetermi­
nate cultivars are technically perennial plants 
because they keep growing until adverse conditions 
stop their growth. Indeterminate cultivars require 
more pruning and larger cages or taller stakes. 
Harvesting 
The tomato is an unusual plant; cell division in 
the future fruit is nearly over at the time of flower­
ing. A small but fully formed tomato can be seen at 
the base of the flower as soon as it opens. Further 
development is largely a matter of cell growth. The 
tomato reaches full size in 20 to 30 days, about half 
the length of the total ripening period. 
Tomatoes should be harvested when they are firm 
and changing color. They are of highest quality when 
they ripen on healthy vines and daily temperatures 
are about 80 degrees F. When temperatures are 
higher (90 degrees F or more), the softening process 
is accelerated and color development is retarded. 
During hot summer weather, pick tomatoes every 
day or every other day. Harvest the fruit when it has 
a healthy pink color and ripen it further indoors (at 
70 to 75 degrees F). Harvest all green, mature fruit in 
the fall on the day before a killing frost is expected. 
Wrap the tomatoes individually in paper and store at 
55 to 65 degrees F. They will ripen slowly during the 
next several weeks. Immature green tomatoes may be 
harvested and used for frying or processed for relish, 
pickles, etc. 

Common Problems 
Insects 
Tomato hornworms are large (2 to 3 inches long 
when fully grown) green worms with white stripes on 
their bodies and a horn protruding from the top of 
the rear end. They feed on the leaves and fruit and 
can quickly defoliate a plant. They are difficult to see 
when small. Pick the worms off or use a suggested 
biological insecticide, such as Dipel, Bt or Thuricide. 
Tomato fruitworms are almost sure to be found in 
the garden. The moth lays the eggs in the terminal 
growth (top growth of the plant) then the larvae 
(small worms) hatch and make their way to the fruit. 
Once a larva is inside the fruit, it’s too late to save 
that fruit. Use the recommended insecticide every 
seven days. 
Stinkbugs attack the fruit and produce small, 
irregular, cloudy white spots under the skin of 
the fruit. 
Diseases 
Verticillium and fusarium wilt are diseases that 
cause yellowing of the leaves, wilting and premature 
dying of the plant. These diseases persist in gardens 
where susceptible plants grow, and the only practical 
control is resistant (VF) varieties. 
Early blight is characterized by dead brown spots 
that usually start on the lower leaves, spread up the 
plant and cause defoliation. Upon close inspection, 
concentric rings can be seen within the spots. 
Although early blight is most severe on the leaves, it 
sometimes occurs on the stems. Use fungicide sprays 
for high yields and quality fruit. Some varieties are 
more tolerant of early blight than others. Remove 
diseased leaves from the garden and dispose of them. 
Septoria leafspot is characterized by numerous 
small brown spots on the leaves. The centers of these 
spots later turn white, and tiny black dots appear in 
the white center. The disease starts on the bottom 
leaves and may become severe in wet weather. Use 
suggested fungicides for control. 
Physiological Disorders 
Blossom-end rot, a dry, leathery rot on the 
blossom end of the fruit, is common in homegrown 
tomatoes. It is caused by a combination of calcium 
deficiency and wide fluctuations in soil moisture. 
Severe pruning stresses the plants and increases the 
incidence of blossom-end rot. Some tomatoes are 
much more susceptible to this condition than others. 
Liming the soil, mulching and uniform watering help 
prevent blossom-end rot. 
Poor fruit set of large-fruited tomatoes occurs 
when night temperatures remain warm, above 
72 degrees F, for six hours or more. Cherry tomatoes 
will continue to set fruit during these warm periods. 
Poor color and sunscald occur when high 
temperatures retard the development of full color in 
tomatoes exposed directly to the sun. Sunscald 
appears on the fruit during hot, dry weather as a 
large whitish area. It becomes a problem when 
foliage has been lost through other diseases, such as 
early blight. 
diseases – early blight, Septoria leafspot, 
verticillium and fusarium wilts, late blight, tobacco 
mosaic virus, bacterial spot, tomato spotted wilt virus 
insects – flea beetle, hornworm, pinworm, stink 
bugs, Colorado potato beetle, fruitworm, aphids, 
mites, whiteflies, cutworms 
other pests – nematodes 
cultural – blossom-end rot caused by irregular 
soil moisture or calcium deficiency, poor color, yellow 
spots or large whitish-gray spots, sunscald from lack 
of foliage cover, leaf roll, fruit cracking, irregular 
soil moisture, black walnut wilt caused by roots of 
tomato plants coming in close contact with roots of 
black walnut trees 
Harvesting and Storage 
days to maturity – 55 to 105 
harvest – Harvest when fully ripened but still 
firm; most varieties are dark red. Place in shade. 
Light is not necessary for ripening. Mature green 
tomatoes may be picked, and when desired, ripen 
fruits at 70 degrees F. 
approximate yield (per 10 feet of row) – 15 to 
45 pounds 
amount to raise per person – 20 to 25 pounds for 
fresh use; 25 to 40 pounds for canning or drying 
storage – green tomatoes – medium cool (50 to 
70 degrees F), moist (90 percent relative humidity) 
conditions, 1 to 3 weeks; ripe tomatoes – cool (40 to 
45 degrees F), moist (90 percent relative humidity) 
conditions, 7 to 10 days 
preservation – can, dry or freeze as sauces or in 
chunks (whole or quartered), peeled 
Frequently Asked Questions 
Q. What causes the lower leaves of my tomato 
plants to roll up? 
A.  Leaf roll (curling of the leaflets) is a physiological 
condition that occurs most commonly when plants 
are trained and pruned. Any type of stress can 
cause leaf roll. It does not affect fruiting or 
quality, and it is not a disease. 

 
 
 
Q. What causes the flowers to drop off my 
tomato plants? 
A.  During unfavorable weather (night temperatures 
lower than 55 degrees F or above 72 degrees F 
and day temperatures above 95 degrees F with 
dry, hot winds), tomatoes do not set fruit and the 
flowers drop. The problem usually disappears as 
the weather improves. 
Q. What causes the young leaves of my plants 
to become pointed and irregular in shape? I 
noticed the twisting of the leaves and stems 
after spraying the plants for the first time. 
A.  Your tomato plants have been injured by 2,4-D or 
a similar weed killer. Never use the same sprayer 
for weed control in your vegetable garden you 
used on your lawn. Drift from herbicides originat­
ing one-half mile or more away can also injure 
tomato plants. A virus disease called cucumber 
mosaic virus (CMV) can mimic these symptoms. 
Q. How often should my tomato plants be 
fertilized? 
A.  Fertilize the garden before planting tomatoes. 
Apply fertilizer again when fruit first sets. After 
the first fruit sets, side-dress the plants with 
additional fertilizer every two weeks. Fertilize 
plants grown on sandy soils more frequently than 
those grown on heavy clay soils. A general 
side-dress fertilizer recommendation is 1 1/2 level 
tablespoons of a complete fertilizer (10-20-10 or 
13-13-13) scattered around the plant and worked 
into the soil. 
Q. What causes large, black spots on the 
bottom or blossom end of my tomatoes? 
A.  Blossom-end rot is caused by improper moisture 
conditions. This results in a calcium deficiency in 
the developing fruit. Make sure the soil pH is 
above 6.0. Maintain uniform soil moisture as the 
fruit grows. Remove affected fruit. When possible, 
use calcium nitrate to fertilize the plants. 
Q. If tomatoes are picked green or before they 
are fully mature, how should they be 
handled to ensure proper ripening and 
full flavor? 
A.  Never refrigerate tomatoes if immature when 
picked. Place them in a single layer at room 
temperature, and allow them to develop full color. 
When fully ripe, place them in the refrigerator 
where they can be stored for several weeks. 
Q. My tomatoes were healthy during the spring 
and early summer; yet after a rain, they 
wilted and died very rapidly. I found a 
white fungal growth at the base of the plant. 
A.  This is southern blight, a soilborne fungus that 
lives on organic material in the soil. Deep burial 
of undecomposed organic material in the soil 
reduces this problem. Control foliage diseases of 
tomato plants, because the fallen leaves around 
the base of the plant feed the fungus and allow it 
to build up near the plant and cause damage. 
Crop rotation also reduces the incidence of 
southern blight. 
Q. My tomato plants wilted rapidly. When I cut 
the stem open, I found a brown ring around 
the inside. 
A.  This is fusarium wilt caused by a soilborne 
fungus that attacks tomatoes and other crops. 
Use resistant varieties to control this disease. 
Most commercial tomato varieties are resistant. 
Before you plant a cultivar, make sure it is 
resistant to fusarium wilt. This resistance is 
denoted by the letter F after the name; for 
example, Celebrity VFN. 
Q. The lower foliage on my tomatoes is 
beginning to turn yellow and drop. The 
leaves have circular dark brown to 
black spots. 
A.  This is Alternaria leaf spot or early blight, a 
common problem on tomatoes that causes 
defoliation usually during periods of high rain­
fall. Plant tomatoes on a raised bed to improve 
water drainage, and space them so air can move 
to dry the foliage and prevent diseases. Start a 
fungicide spray program when the fruit is set and 
continue at one-week intervals during the 
growing season until harvest. Use a fungicide 
such as Daconil approved for home garden use. 
Q. The foliage on my tomatoes is covered by 
small circular-shaped spots that cause it to 
turn yellow and drop off. This occurs in all 
seasons and is on the top and bottom leaves. 
A.  Several types of leaf spots attack tomatoes. 
Septoria leaf spot quite often starts at the bottom 
of the plant and rapidly spreads. It can be 
controlled with a fungicide spray. Begin the spray 
program early in the life of the plant. 
Q. What causes my upper tomato leaves to turn 
yellowish and fall off? 
A.  Many conditions may cause these symptoms, 
including spider mites, diseases and nutrient 
deficiencies. Examine the underside of the leaves 
for small, red to greenish mites. If you find mites, 
treat with two to three applications of insecticides 
at five-day intervals. 
Q. How do you select good transplants at 
nurseries or garden centers? 
A.  First, select the right cultivar. Look for plants 
that appear healthy, dark green in color and do 
not have any spots or holes in the leaves. The 
ideal tomato transplant should have five leaves 
and no flowers. Avoid tall, spindly plants with 
weak stems and leathery purple leaves. 

 
 
 
Q. What causes some of my early tomato fruit
from the spring garden to be oddly shaped
and of poor quality?
A.
This condition is usually caused by stress and low
temperatures during flower formation, bloom and
pollination. Fruit set when temperatures are
55 degrees F or below often are odd-shaped and of
poor quality. The blooms are abnormal because of
temperature conditions and grow into abnormal,
odd-shaped fruit. Another name for this disorder
is catfacing.
Q. My tomato fruits have small yellow specks
on the surface. When the fruit is peeled,
those yellow specks form a tough spot that
must be cut off before eating the tomatoes.
What is wrong?
A.
The yellow speckling is caused by injury from
sucking insects such as stinkbugs or leaf-footed
bugs. Early control of sucking insects that feed on
the fruit is necessary to reduce the problem.
Q. Will tomatoes become fully ripe and red if
they are harvested early?
A.
Yes. Fruits harvested at the first blush of pink
will ripen fully. A tomato picked at the first sign
of color and ripened at room temperature will be
just as tasty and colorful as one left to fully
mature on the vine. Picking tomatoes before they
turn red reduces bird and squirrel damage.
Q. My tomato plants look great. They are dark
green, vigorous and healthy. However,
flowers are not forming any fruit. What is
the problem?
A.
Several conditions can cause tomatoes to not set
fruit. Too much nitrogen fertilizer, nighttime
temperatures over 75 degrees F, low
temperatures below 50 degrees F, irregular
watering, insects such as thrips or planting the
wrong cultivar may result in poor fruit set.
Q. Are there really low-acid tomato varieties?
A.
Some varieties are less acidic than others. Some
yellow-fruited types are slightly less acidic than
the normal red varieties. Flavor differences
between varieties are not because of differences
in acid content but the sugar-to-acid balance.
Cherry tomatoes are higher in both sugar and
acid levels.
Q. When caging tomatoes, how large are the
cages?
A.
The diameter of the cage should be at least 18 to
20 inches at the top. Smaller cages often restrict
plant growth and reduce yields. Height of the 
cage varies, but generally 3 1/2 feet is sufficient 
for the recommended varieties. However, with 
vining types such as Better Boy or Cherry 
Grande, a cage 5 feet in height is preferred. 
Whatever cultivar, a cage 3 1/2 feet tall is 
sufficient for most fall garden tomatoes. 
Q. What causes a tomato fruit to crack? What
can I do?
A.
Cracking is a physiological disorder caused by soil
moisture fluctuations. When the tomato reaches
the mature green stage, reduce or cut off the
water supply to the plant as the tomato begins to
ripen. At this time, the skin around the outer
surface of the tomato becomes thicker and more
rigid to protect the tomato during and after
harvest. If the water supply is restored after
ripening begins, the plant resumes translocation
of nutrients and moisture into the fruit. This
causes the fruit to enlarge, and the skin splits
around the fruit resulting in cracking. The best
control for cracking is a constant and regular
water supply. Apply a layer of organic mulch to
the base of the plant. This serves as a buffer and
prevents soil moisture fluctuation. Some varieties
are resistant to cracking, and we try to
recommend these varieties.
Q. My tomato plants are stunted and have pale
yellow foliage. The root system has knots or
swelling on the roots.
A.
These are root-knot nematodes. Some varieties
such as Celebrity and Better Boy resist this
problem. It is best to use only nematode-resistant
varieties. Nematode resistance is shown by
the letter N after the name; for example,
Celebrity VFN.
Q. We planted tomatoes in our small garden.
They are loaded and are the best tomatoes
we have ever had; however, there are some
small holes near the stem end of the tomato.
When we cut the tomato open, there is a
small worm inside. What is it and what can
we do?
A.
Your fruit has been invaded by the tomato
pinworm. They usually do not damage all fruit
and can be controlled only by a preventive
insecticide spray every 7 to 10 days. When the
damage is evident, it is too late to do anything
about it.
DR. CRAIG R. ANDERSEN is associate professor and Extension 
specialist - vegetables, Horticulture Department, University of 
Arkansas Division of Agriculture, Fayetteville. 
Pursuant to 7 CFR § 15.3, the University of Arkansas System Division 
of Agriculture offers all its Extension and Research programs and 
services (including employment) without regard to race, color, sex, 
national origin, religion, age, disability, marital or veteran status, 
genetic information, sexual preference, pregnancy or any other legally 
protected status, and is an equal opportunity institution.
FSA6017-PD-5-11RV