Septoria leaf spot, which is caused by Septoria lycopersici, results in spotting and wilting of tomato foliage. 
This fungal disease causes circular spots with dark brown margins and tan to gray centers dotted with black 
pycnidia.  A narrow yellow halo is often associated with leaf lesions.  If the leaf lesions are numerous, some 
infected leaves turn slightly yellow and then brown, and they wither.  Fruit infection is rare.
Septoria 
 
lycopersici 
overwinters 
on infected tomato debris or debris 
of solanaceous weed hosts, such as 
horsenettle.  The fungus can also survive 
on equipment such as plant stakes and 
cages.  Once introduced to a planting area, 
conidia are spread by splashing water 
from rain or sprinkler irrigation.  Long 
periods of high relative humidity, high 
temperatures, and leaf wetness constitute 
ideal conditions for disease development 
and spread of the pathogen.
Tomatoes should be treated with registered 
protective fungicide sprays at regular 
intervals during the growing season. 
There are several fungicides available 
to home gardeners that are effective in 
controlling septoria.  To be a prudent consumer you need to read the fine print on the product label while you are 
shopping.  First, the product must be labeled for use on the crop (ex. tomatoes, potatoes, etc.).  Second, look at 
the active ingredient(s) listed on the label. Products that contain chlorothalonil or ethylene bisdithiocarbamate 
(EBDC) will protect plants from infection.  Depending on the particular manufacturer the trade names vary, these 
may be sold under trade names such as Daconil, Mancozeb, or Fungonil, to name a few.  Theses fungicides will 
need to be reapplied frequently, usually a 7-day interval is recommended.  Refer to the product label for specific 
instructions.  
In addition to fungicide sprays, cultural control measures include rotating for at least 1-2 years between tomato 
crops, control of susceptible weeds (such as horsenettle) in rotation crops, removal of crop debris from the planting 
area, careful attention to the timing of irrigation to reduce the length of time during which the plants remain wet, 
and staking plants to improve air circulation and reduce contact between foliage and soil.
MSU is an affirmative-action, equal-opportunity employer. Michigan State University Extension programs 
and materials are open to all without regard to race, color, national origin, gender, gender identity, religion, 
age, height, weight, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, marital status, family status or veteran 
status. Issued in furtherance of MSU Extension work, acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, in cooperation 
with the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Thomas G. Coon, Director, MSU Extension, East Lansing,   MI 
48824. This information is for educational purposes only. Reference to commercial products or trade 
names does not imply endorsement by MSU Extension or bias against those not mentioned.
Septoria Leaf Spot 
of Tomato
                                     Prepared by Jackie Smith, MSU Diagnostic Services
Septoria leafspot. William M. Brown Jr., , Bugwood.org