Agriculture & Natural Resources
Cooperative Extension
Santa Clara County
Saving Tomato Seeds
So you’ve heard about heirloom seeds and want to try saving your own? Here’s how.
Open-pollinated vs. hybrid
First, make sure that the variety you’re saving is
open-pollinated, not hybrid. All heirloom tomatoes
are open-pollinated. Open-pollinated varieties will
come true from seeds, but hybrids are created by seed
companies who carefully crossing two parent plants
to yield seeds for the hybrid variety. So hybrid
varieties will not breed true.
Choosing tomatoes to save
Over many decades, people created heirloom
varieties by carefully selecting and saving seeds from
their best plants, season after season. You can define
‘best’ to be whatever characteristic you’re after:
biggest or healthiest plant, biggest, tastiest, most
interesting or colorful tomato. Whatever you want,
just choose the best examples of what you’re saving.
For instance, if you have two plants and one is sickly,
the other healthy, choose a tomato from the healthy
one. The sickly one may be carrying some weakness
in its genes, so you don’t want to propogate that. This
is not a time for “waste not, want not.” You want the
best. Similarly, choose tomatoes in their prime, not
over-ripe or under-ripe, diseased, mis-shapened, etc.
Since you’re just saving the seeds, you’ll get to eat
most of the tomato anyhow, so this isn’t a real
sacrifice. To maintain good genetic diversity, it’s best
to save seeds from multiple tomatoes, and preferably
from more than one plant of the same variety, if
possible.
Fermentation
You don’t absolutely have to ferment the seeds, but it
makes the seeds easier to separate from the gel, helps
sort out bad seeds, reduces some seed-borne illnesses,
and eliminates a germination inhibitor. If you’re
going to trade seeds with other people, it’s considered
good etiquette to ferment your seeds. Here’s how.
Cut the tomato in half and scoop or squeeze out the
seeds and gel into a small container labeled with the
variety name. Set the rest of the tomato aside for
eating. Add 1/4 to 1/2 cup of water. Set the container
aside, out of the sun, for 3 to 5 days. A moldy film
will probably form on top. That’s okay.
To separate the seeds: First carefully remove the film.
Then add some more water and stir. Good seeds will
sink, so carefully pour off the water and the floating
bits of pulp. Repeat until all the pulp is gone and you
have clean seeds. Drain them as well as you can
(using a paper towel helps), then spread them in a
single layer on a screen or a paper plate to dry. You
can use paper towels, but the seeds tend to stick to
them. Don’t use plastic or ceramic plates! The seeds
need to have the water wicked away from them. If
you’re saving multiple varieties, be sure to label the
plates.
Storage
Once the seeds are thoroughly dry, place in an
airtight container for storage. Tomato seeds remain
viable for years, even stored at room temperature. For
extra protection, you can store them in the
refrigerator or freezer, but let them come to room
temperature before opening the jar so you don’t
introduce moisture from condensation. Small packets
of silica gel will help absorb excess moisture also.
Crosses
Tomato flowers will generally fertilize themselves,
but a busy bee could create a natural hybrid for you.
Commercial growers isolate their varieties by large
distances to ensure pure seed. That’s not an option
for most home growers, but if you’ve got an active
bee population in your tomato patch, you could try
bagging your blossoms instead.
Choose a cluster of flowers that haven’t opened yet
and place a paper or cloth (not plastic) bag over them
for a few days. Shaking it gently every morning may
help pollination. Remove the bag after the flowers
whither, marking the cluster with a tag so you’ll
remember which one you bagged. Watch to see if any
fruits start to form. If not, try again with another
cluster.
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1555 Berger Dr., Bldg. 2, San Jose, CA 95112 
Contact Help Desk: mgsantaclara.ucanr.edu