1
Vegetable Diseases
Purdue Extension
Late Blight of Tomato and Potato
Dan Egel, Gail Ruhl, and Tom Creswell
Purdue Botany and Plant Pathology
BP-80-W
www.btny.purdue.edu
Late blight of tomato and potato has an infamous history: it is the documented cause of 
the Irish potato famines of the mid-1800s. In 2009, the diseases moved from the pages 	
of history books to tomato plants in your backyard.
Unusual circumstances permitted this plant disease to spread to more than 30 Indiana 
counties in 2009. The last time late blight occurred in Indiana was 1998, when a minor 
outbreak infected potatoes. Although late blight is not likely to become permanently 
established in Indiana, this disease can be serious when present.
This bulletin examines late blight of tomato and potato and provides management 
options. 
Disease Cycle and Symptoms
The fungal-like organism that causes late blight, Phytophthora infestans, affects both 
tomatoes and potatoes. Fortunately for Indiana growers, this organism has not overwin-
tered in Indiana due to our relatively cold winters. However, Phytophthora infestans spores 
can be blown into Indiana from other states, introduced on plant material (such as potato 
seed pieces), or on tomato transplants (as likely occurred in 2009).
Late blight of tomato or potato thrives under cool, wet conditions, such as occurred 
in the summer of 2009. The fungus produces spores that easily blow from plant to plant. 
Upon germinating, the spores may produce swimming structures that are ideal for 
spreading the disease under wet conditions.
Under moist conditions, the green to brown lesions on leaves may be ringed with 	
the white fungus that causes late blight (Figure 1). Fruit also may be affected. Fruit 	
quality may be affected after foliage dies, or the fungus may directly penetrate the fruit 
(Figure 2). The disease can spread and kill plants rapidly; so much so that it is common 
for affected tomatoes or potatoes to appear as if they had experienced a frost although 
none has occurred (Figure 3).
Figure 1. The late blight lesion on this tomato plant leaf has white coloration at the edge, which is 
the fungus that causes the disease.
Photo by Dan Egel

2
Purdue Extension
Vegetable Diseases     Late Blight of Tomato and Potato	
 BP-80-W                
2/10
It is the policy of the Purdue University Cooperative Extension Service that all persons have equal opportunity and access to its educational programs, services, activities, and 
facilities without regard to race, religion, color, sex, age, national origin or ancestry, marital status, parental status, sexual orientation, disability or status as a veteran. 
Purdue University is an Affirmative Action institution. This material may be available in alternative formats.
Purdue Agriculture
Order or download materials at the Purdue Extension 
Education Store  •  www.ces.purdue.edu/new
While the fungus that causes late blight does not produce any 
toxins, avoid eating tomatoes with lesions. Fruit infected with 
late blight are easily contaminated with microorganisms that 
can cause illness.
Management
Many tomato growers are now wondering whether late blight 
will be a yearly occurrence in Indiana. Perhaps the most likely 
way the fungus could survive in Indiana is on overwintering 
potatoes or saved potato seed pieces. To avoid the overwinter-
ing of late blight:
• 	Do not use potato seed pieces from the 2009 season when 
planting the 2010 crop. It is very unlikely tomato seed saved 
from 2009 will harbor the late blight organisms; however, 
there might be other disease issues. 
• 	Leave potato tubers on the soil surface where they are more 
likely to be frozen. You also can crush old potatoes. Com-
posting 2009 potato tubers is not recommended. 
• 	Destroy potato volunteers next year as they come up.
• 	In greenhouses, avoid practices that could help the late blight 
fungus overwinter. Tomatoes or potatoes produced off-sea-
son in greenhouses could potentially harbor the late blight 
fungus if green material is kept living until spring.
• 	Inspect transplants carefully in the spring for symptoms of 
disease. Purchase only healthy, vigorous plants.
Fungicides may slow the progress of late blight. Retail prod-
ucts that contain the active ingredient chlorothalonil may help 
to reduce the spread of the disease if applied on a regular basis. 
Trade names include Bonide®, Daconil®, Exotherm Termil®, and 
PathGuard®. Organic growers may find that copper products 
slow the spread of the disease.
Finally, be safe. Always read the label of any pesticide you 
apply and follow all the directions. 
Find Out More
If you see suspicious tomato or potato symptoms, contact 
your Purdue Extension county educator or Purdue Plant and 
Pest Diagnostic Laboratory. You can track plant disease alerts 
at the virtual Plant and Pest Diagnostic Laboratory.
Find your county educator by going online or calling 	
toll free:
www.extension.purdue.edu 	
	
	
	
	
	
(follow the County Offices link)
(888) EXT-INFO
Purdue Plant and Pest Diagnosic Lab:
www.ppdl.purdue.edu
To see other publications in the Vegetable Diseases series, 
visit the Purdue Extension Educations Store:	
www.extension.purdue.edu/store
Figure 2. A tomato fruit with brown discoloration caused by 	
late blight.
Figure 3. Late blight of tomato may spread rapidly, killing leaves, 
fruit, stems, and entire plants.
Photo by Dan Egel
Photo by Ray Martyn