An Introduction 
to Tomato 
Grafting 
 
A How-To Guide for Propagating Your Own 
Grafted Transplants 
 
 
 
David Loewen, Lani Meyer, and Dr. Cary Rivard 
 
 
Kansas State University 
Department of Horticulture and Natural Resources 

Introduction 
 
Vegetable growers around the world have been using grafted plants since the early 
1920’s. Initially this was to manage Fusarium wilt in melons, but by the 1930’s 
tomatoes were being grafted onto Jimsonweed in the southern United States to 
control root knot nematodes. Though Jimsonweed fell out of favor as a rootstock, by 
the 1960’s, interspecific hybrid rootstocks (crosses between cultivated tomato 
varieties and their wild relatives) were introduced and grafted tomatoes began to be 
produced on a commercial level. While this trend first took hold in Japan and Korea, 
where well over half of the vegetable production makes use of grafted plant, it took 
longer to catch on in the United States. Vegetable grafting (and tomato grafting in 
particular) began to catch on in a significant way in the US beginning in the 1990’s. 
The popularity of grafting in the United States continues to increase today, 
particularly as the use of high-tunnels spreads and soils are becoming more 
intensively cultivated. Additionally, with the phase-out of methyl bromide, many 
growers are searching for alternatives to soil fumigation, and see grafting as a part 
of the solution. 
 
Reasons to Graft 
 
There are three main reasons a grower may choose to use grafted (tomato) plants: 
1) Disease Resistance (or tolerance) 
2) Improved Vigor (enhanced plant growth and/or increased fruit production) 
3) Abiotic Stress Tolerance (less than ideal temperature, moisture, salinity, etc.) 
 
Verticillium wilt, Fusarium wilt, Bacterial wilt, Southern blight, Corky root rot, and 
Root-knot nematodes are all soil-borne diseases caused by root and stem-infecting 
pathogens. These persistent pathogens can be problematic, but are especially so for 
urban, high tunnel, and small growers with limited crop rotation space, or for those 
wishing to produce highly susceptible heirloom tomato varieties. For this reason, 
disease resistance is likely the most common reason given for grafting tomato 
plants. While tomatoes are susceptible to a variety of soil-borne diseases, certain 
rootstocks have been shown to be resistant or tolerant of many of these, and 
grafting may be a good option for growers looking to control a variety of soil-borne 
diseases.  
 
Researchers have also found that selected rootstocks can aid with other abiotic 
stresses such as temperature and salinity as well as increase in the efficiency of 
water and nutrient uptake.  Grafted tomatoes with vigorous rootstocks have shown 
to increase tomato yields even in the absence of soil diseases, or abiotic pressure 
and it seems likely that the full productive potential of such vigorous rootstocks may 
only be unlocked under the best conditions. Therefore, regardless of their pest, 
disease, or soil-quality status, a grower using the right rootstock/scion combination 
has the potential to improve their yield with fewer plants and less cultivated space. 
 

Grafting Challenges 
 
Although grafting is a promising solution for several production issues, it does pose 
a few (primarily logistical) challenges. For about two weeks propagators must 
produce two plants, which adds costs, space, and time. Besides additional overhead 
expenses, the annual cost of rootstock seed and skilled grafting labor can be most 
distressing.  For this reason, grafted plants will typically cost at least three times 
that of their non-grafted counterparts. However, with an increase in yield, especially 
when combating otherwise devastating disease issues, grafting can still be very 
profitable. 
 
Unfortunately, the availability of grafted tomatoes for growers in the mid-west to 
purchase is currently very limited, therefore the following publication is intended to 
help interested growers successfully propagate their own grafted tomatoes.  
 
Scion Selection 
 
Scion Selection is much simpler than rootstock selection in some ways. Scions are 
chosen by looking for a cultivar with desirable fruit characteristics (e.g. appearance, 
size, flavor, shelf-life etc.) However, it should be noted that while the characteristics 
of a specific rootstock are typically fairly stable, specific rootstock-scion 
compatibility is somewhat variable (not all scions interact with the same rootstock 
in the same way). Your selection of scion should also help you determine whether 
you choose a generative or vegetative rootstock. If your scion is an indeterminant, 
and already produces large amounts of vegetation (like many heirloom varieties) 
you will likely want to choose a generative rootstock (generative rootstocks help to 
improve fruit production). However, if you are using a determinant scion variety 
(like many hybrid or commercial varieties) you will likely want to choose a 
vegetative rootstock, which will increase the size of the plant and give more room 
for additional fruit set. 
 
Rootstock Selection 
 
The first important step of successful grafting is selecting the right rootstock. You 
need to ask yourself “What are my reasons for grafting?”. Being honest with yourself 
about the strengths and shortcomings of your production system will help 
significantly in making a wise rootstock choice. 
 
If your goal is disease management, you’ll want to correctly identify your specific 
soil-borne disease (Table 1) and select a rootstock that has corresponding 
resistance genes (more extensive lists of rootstocks and their genetic resistance to 
particular soil-borne diseases can be found at 
http://www.vegetablegrafting.org/resources/rootstock-tables/). 
 

If your goal is to combat specific abiotic stressors, you should look for rootstocks 
that have been shown to combat those distinct stressors. “Arnold” may be a good 
choice if soil salinity is your main problem, however, you may need to consider 
other solanaceous species as potential rootstocks. For example, eggplant rootstocks 
work well with tomatoes and are very tolerant of flooding or waterlogging.  
 
If your production system is fairly well established, you have little disease pressure, 
few abiotic stressors, and are getting good yields from your nongrafted plants, you 
may wish to graft purely to improve your yields. As such you should look for 
rootstocks that enhance a plants productive vigor. Often times these rootstocks will 
provide resistance or tolerance to one or more soil-borne diseases or abiotic 
stressors, so even if your primary reason for grafting is disease or stress 
management, you may be able to add extra productive vigor as well. A good example 
of such a rootstock is “Maxifort”. 
 
Seeding 
 
The entire grafting process from seeding to field-ready transplant takes 
approximately 5 weeks (Table 2). It is therefore important to keep in mind that the 
propagation process for grafted tomatoes should start about two weeks earlier than 
for standard, non-grafted plants.  The biggest challenge in producing seedlings for 
grafting is keeping the scion and rootstock growth uniform. Maintaining uniformity 
will not only make grafting easier, it will also help to improve your success rate.  If 
(Table 1) genetic resistance of a few tomato rootstock varieties to various soil-
borne diseases 

the germination time or growth rate is significantly different from rootstock to 
scion, a propagator can stagger seeding dates to keep seedling size similar.  It can be 
advantageous for a grower to test the germination rate and time of seeds by trialing 
a set number of seeds before starting a larger batch. 
Seeds should be obtained from reputable utilize a protocol for treating seed if not 
purchasing from a certified source, this will reduce the potential for diseases like 
bacterial canker. Seed should be sown in a fine seeding mix about 1/8-inch-deep 
and kept in a warm moist environment.  For more consistent germination, a heating 
pad controlled by a thermostat with a soil probe may be used to keep the soil at 
approximately 78oF. Plastic domes can also be used to keep the soil moist during 
germination.  However, such domes may retain too much heat, especially in a 
greenhouse, so unless you germinate your seeds under artificial light, covering the 
domes with a reflective or shading material may be necessary .  As soon as seeds 
start to sprout, shade and domes should be removed in order to give the plant full 
light.  If using artificial light be sure to position lights directly above the seedlings to 
avoid stretching.  Seeds should be finely misted about twice a day to maintain 
consistent soil moisture while the root systems develop.  
 
Transplant Management 
 
Approximately 10-14 days after seeding, seedlings can be transplanted into seedling 
trays using clean soilless media. The use of soil or compost-based planting media 
can be risky as such media may harbor fungus or bacteria, increasing the risk of 
infection throughout the grafting process. 
 
(Table 2) Approximate timeline of tomato grafting process 

Though your growing medium may have an incorporated starter fertilizer, a liquid 
complete (N-P-K) fertilizer should be used on a weekly basis to keep transplants 
healthy.  After approximately 21-28 days post seeding, transplant stem diameter 
should be about 1.5- 2.5 mm, and plants should have 2-3 sets of visible adult leaves. 
 
When transplanting, it can be advantageous to transplant seedlings of 
approximately the same size into the same tray in order to allow for more precise 
tray-by-tray temperature (growth rate) control. The ideal growing temperatures for 
tomato transplants range from 65o to 85oF, and this 20 degree range can be utilized 
to improve the uniformity of the seedlings at grafting. If the scion and rootstock 
seem to be growing at different rates, modifying the growing temperature can help 
to equalize the two. Cooling to 55o - 65oF  can help to slow growth, growth may be 
accelerated by placing the plants on a heating pad (75o - 85oF ). As a last resort, 
significant leaf removal in the final days prior to grafting may pause growth long 
enough to allow the graft partner to catch up. Placing plants in a lower light may 
also help to slow growth, but this should be done carefully, as low light may cause 
the plants to stretch.  
 
How Grafting Works 
 
Grafting takes advantage of a plants natural wounding response and healing 
process. Understanding this wounding response will help you understand the 
grafting process, and may help you diagnose any problems you may encounter. 
 
The plant wound response takes place in a series of steps: 
1) When a plant is damaged mechanically, the layer of damaged tissue typically 
dies. This is known as the “necrotic layer”.  
2) The plant now begins to generate a mass of callus tissue, Callus tissue is 
essentially an undifferentiated and disorganized cell mass that fills in behind 
and eventually replaces the necrotic layer, forming a scar.  
3) If no other callus tissue is recognized the plant will seal off the wound to 
prevent infection. However, if this callus tissue encounters other callus tissue 
(i.e. the tissue from the rootstock encountering the tissue from the scion) the 
two sets of callus tissue begin to communicate and coordinate the healing 
process. This interconnected tissue mass formed of callus from both scion 
and rootstock is called the “Callus bridge”.  
4) Callus tissue in the bridge coordinates cell differentiation to reconnect the 
vascular cambium across the bridge, which then differentiates into phloem 
(3-4 days post-grafting*) and xylem (6-8 days post-grafting*). 
* for tomatoes 

Grafting Prep 
 
Prior to grafting, a grafting kit must be assembled. For the most part this is made up 
of materials and tools that are easy to find at any dollar or big-box store if you do 
not already have them lying around your house. You should also construct your 
healing chamber prior to grafting. 
 
You will need to assemble the following: 
1) Sharp razor blade or hobby knife 
Sharpness is critical when grafting as this reduces the damage you are 
doing at the cellular level, and thus minimizes the resulting layer of dead 
tissue forming between the grafting partners. 
2) Scissors 
3) latex gloves 
Important for maintaining sanitary working conditions and preventing 
infection (absolutely necessary if you are a tobacco user, as tomatoes are 
highly susceptible to tobacco mosaic virus) 
4) paper towels 
5) Isopropyl alcohol 
It is a good idea to get a small container that the isopropyl alcohol may be 
poured into, so tools can be dipped and sanitized 
6) Compost bin or plastic bucket 
Any kind of container that you can use to dispose of the unused portions 
of the rootstock and scion after grafting 
7) Clean grafting clips in at least two contiguous sizes to account for variation in 
transplant size (sizes 1.5 mm and 2.0 mm are recommended) 
Grafting clips are one of the few items you will likely not be able to 
obtain locally. While you may be able to make your own from short 
lengths of silicon tubing, grafting clips are easy to order online, will be 
more user-friendly, and are relatively inexpensive. 
See the following websites for grafting clips 
http://www.graftingclips.com/products/clips-for-tomatoes/tubes/ 
http://www.johnnyseeds.com/tools-supplies/seed-starting- supplies/silicone-
top-grafting-clip-2.0-mm-9847.html 
http://www.tomatogrowers.com/GRAFTING-CLIPS/productinfo/6936/ 
https://www.harrisseeds.com/products/40862-grafting-clips-2-mm 
 
The healing chamber provides nearly ideal (warm, humid, and dark) conditions for 
bacterial and fungal proliferation. As such, sanitation, both of the chamber and 
throughout all steps of the grafting process is essential. This means cleaning the 
work area prior to grafting, washing your hands, wearing gloves, sanitizing your 
tools frequently, and using paper towels to keep your work area clean (and as a 
clean surface on which to set sanitized tools 
 
 
 

How to Graft 
 
There are several different methods of grafting tomatoes, but the splice-grafting 
method (also known as “tube grafting” or “Japanese top-grafting”) described below 
is relatively simple and has a high rate of success. For this reason, it is probably the 
most popular method for grafting tomatoes.  
 
The evening before grafting, water plants well so that the soil will be wet but the 
foliage will be dry for grafting.  If watering the day of, consider bottom watering to 
avoid wetting the foliage. If desired, scions may also be placed in lower light to help 
acclimate them to low light and decrease transpiration.  
 
While grafting, remember to sanitize your blade and scissors with alcohol and wipe 
clean. Repeat after about 10-20 cuts.  
 
Grafting Steps 
 
1. Trim 80-90% of the leaves off of the scion with sharp clean scissors or blade 
taking care not to disturb apical meristem (growing point) 
2. Using your razor blade or hobby knife, cut the rootstock just below the 
cotyledons at ~70-degree angle (Figure 1). 
3. Pinch to open clip and place half way on rootstock facing perpendicular to 
the cut. Make sure to use an appropriately sized clip (Figure 1). 
4. Select a scion with the same diameter stem* and cut at the same 70-degree 
angle (Figure 1). Note that well-matched stem diameters are one of the most 
important factors to ensure physical compatibility between the rootstock and 
scion. For tomatoes, this cut may be made above or below the cotyledons, 
and since the stem tapers to some degree the cut should be made where the 
stem diameter best matches the rootstock (this is very important as the 
vascular bundles in tomato plants are arranged in a ring and need to line up 
in order to reconnect properly across the callus bridge). 
5. Slide scion into clip making sure there is even surface contact with the 
rootstock (Figure 1). Contact should be firm to ensure minimal space is 
created between grafting partners as the necrotic layer forms. Minimizing 
this space will 
improve the 
likelihood of 
successful callus 
bridge formation. 
6. Place finished trays 
immediately into the 
low light and high 
humidity healing 
chamber. 
 
(Figure 1) splice-grafting procedure

Healing Chambers 
 
The most challenging part of the grafting process is post-grafting healing chamber 
management.  A healing chamber is a small-enclosed area designed to promote graft 
formation by providing the newly grafted plants with the ideal conditions for rapid 
recovery. Healing chambers may take a variety of forms, but all must allow the 
propagator to control humidity, light, and temperature. 
 
Healing Chamber Construction 
 
As mentioned previously, the healing chamber should be constructed well in 
advance of grafting. Any materials used in the construction or management of a 
chamber should be easily cleaned with sanitizing solution. Typically, a sodium 
hypochlorite (bleach) solution is used. Such a solution is not only an effective 
sanitizer, but is also allowed by organic certification standards provided the 
manufacturer’s instructions are followed regarding solution concentrations.  
Bacteria and fungi are well suited to the environment found within the healing 
chamber, so organic or porous materials that hold moisture (such as wood) should 
be avoided. 
When learning, or for smaller batches of plants, plastic domes, upside-down 
aquariums, or even clear plastic totes placed over individual trays may be used as a 
miniature healing chambers (Figure 3), though for a grower producing multiple 
trays of grafted plants, a large purpose-built chamber is ideal for ease of 
management (Figure 2). Whatever the situation, locate your chamber in a draft-free 
room where the ambient temperature is consistently around 78oF. 
 
(Figure 2) completed healing chamber showing humidifier as described herein 

Before you begin 
construction, keep in 
mind that there are 
many ways to fulfil 
the functional 
requirements of a 
healing chamber, 
and there are many 
different designs out 
there (Figure 4). If 
your situation does 
not permit the 
precise application 
of the plans given 
here, do not be 
afraid to modify or 
innovate. Keep in 
mind that materials used for chamber construction should be kept as clean as 
possible, and especially those coming into direct contact with moisture or plants 
should be sanitized (at a minimum) at the beginning of each grafting season. 
 
Our healing chamber design begins with a composite lumber frame (Figure 7). The 
frame is constructed to accommodate two seedling trays end-to-end across the 
beam, and can be made as long as necessary (within reason) to accommodate the 
desired number of plants, though it should be noted that maintaining a consistent 
microclimate from end to end becomes more challenging with a drastic increase in 
length. 
 
Clean clear 6mm plastic film is 
used to line the bottom of the 
chamber (Figure 7), and is 
clipped into place with PVC 
“clips” (Figure 5). Such clamps 
are simple and inexpensive to 
make, as they are fashioned 
from 2” lengths of 2” outside 
diameter (SCH 40) PVC pipe. 
These short lengths of PVC are 
placed into a vice and one side 
is cut length-wise, they can 
then be pried open by hand 
and hold the plastic securely to 
the composite lumber frame. 
 
Wire arches are then fitted into 
(Figure 3) alternative small batch healing chambers 
showing extra foam-board shade 
(Figure 4) alternative healing chamber design 
using PVC framework 

holes drilled into the frame, and a 
second, larger sheet of clear 6mm 
plastic is tucked under the back and 
then draped over the front and sides of 
the chamber (Figure 7). You will need 
easy access to the chamber, though the 
front and sides should be fastened 
down securely using a few bricks or 
spring clamps most of the time. This 
will prevent drafts and allow for 
effective control of the humidity 
within the chamber. Additionally, 
you should cut several (number depending on the size of your chamber) ~3” square 
holes (not merely slits or “Xs”), about 1 to1.5 ft apart on top of the plastic to release 
heat and allow for some air circulation. 
 
Next add three layers of 55% shade cloth to the top of the chamber (Figure 7). If 
your chamber is located somewhere such as a greenhouse where sunlight may heat 
up your chamber excessively, you may consider covering the top of the chamber 
with a couple of pieces of foam-board to further shade the chamber (Figure 3). 
 
Adding upside-down web trays to the bottom of the chamber (Figure 7) will prevent 
your plants from sitting in any water that may condense and accumulate on the 
bottom of the chamber. 
 
Finally add your 
humidifier (Figure 2) and a 
humidity dispersal pipe 
(Figures 6 & 7). The 
humidifier should be a 
cool-water vaporizer or 
“Sonic” humidifier. For 
smaller setups, passive 
humidification (i.e. a pan 
filled with warm water) 
may be sufficient. Warm 
water vaporizers and 
misters are discouraged as 
the may raise the temperature or damage the graft? The humidity dispersal pipe is 
more necessary for longer healing chambers than shorter ones, and is simply a 
length of PVC pipe with 1/8” holes drilled approximately every 2”. This pipe is hung 
from the wire arches, is capped at one end and connected to the humidifier at the 
other end. This piece is designed to equally disperse the humidity throughout the 
length of the chamber, helping the propagator maintain a consistent microclimate 
within. 
(Figure 5) PVC “clip” 
(Figure 6) humidity dispersal pipe 

 
Healing Chamber Management Protocol 
 
After you have placed your plants in the healing chamber, you will need to give them 
special care for the next 10-12 days. The following protocol is intended as a guide to 
help you manage the healing chamber and encourage the graft healing process. 
 
Day-to-Day Management – Plants should be checked often (every 1-2 h) to 1-2 
times daily depending on where they are on the healing chamber timeline. Keep in 
mind that the chamber will respond to the environment, and to sun light in 
particular.  On sunny days, the chamber will need to be watched closely so that it 
does not heat up too much. Similarly, the chamber will not need to be monitored 
very closely (if at all) once the sun is down. 
 
Chamber Management Tasks – Refill the humidifier as needed. Check the 
temperature on a regular basis, but especially between 11:00 AM and 3:00 PM.  after 
the first day or two vent the chamber daily by billowing the chamber roof to bring in 
fresh air.  Check soil moisture and (bottom) water carefully as needed. Check the 
temperature within the chamber. 
 
(Figure 7) healing chamber assembly (cut away view) 

Note that anytime an “action” is taken (e.g. shade cloth removed, humidifier 
turned down, etc.), the plants should be checked again within 60-90 minutes, 
particularly in the first 4 days of the healing process. 
 
Chamber Management Timeline 
 
This timeline has been designed to assist in the management of grafted plants in the 
healing chamber. It represents a sequence of actions taken to manage the 
microclimate within the healing chamber and day-to-day variances may occur 
depending on the batch, environmental conditions (e.g. greenhouse temp) and other 
factors like day length. Also note that scion leaf removal prior to grafting may affect 
the length of time required for recovery. Some plants may require longer than 10 
days in the chamber. If the plants are wilted or look stressed, do not proceed to the 
next step unless otherwise indicated.  
 
 (F = film chamber, H = humidifier, S = 55% shade cloth) 
 
 
Day 
Chamber 
Notes 
1 
All layers shade, humidifier turned 
up to visible “fog” in chamber.  
(F, H, 3*S) 
Day of grafting. Check often (every 
1-2 h) for wilting 
2 
Remove 1 layer shade cloth.  Turn 
down humidifier to reduce visible 
fog.  (F, H, 2*S) 
Check often (every 1-2 h) for wilting  
3 
Shade cloth stays the same. 
Humidifier output should be 
minimized.  (F, H, 2*S) 
Check 2-3 times daily. 
Can turn humidifier back up if wilting 
occurs or add shade cloth layer 
4 
Shade cloth stays the same.  
Humidifier minimal or turned off.  
Check for watering. (F, H, 2*S) 
Check 2-3 times daily. 
Same as Day 3 
5 
No change.  Keep humidifier use 
minimal.  Check for watering 
(F, 2*S) 
Wilting day(s).  Plants may wilt some 
as they reconnect their tissues.  
Check 2 times daily 
6 
No change.  Keep humidifier use 
minimal.  Check for watering 
 (F, 1*S) 
Wilting day(s).  Plants may wilt some 
as they reconnect their tissues. Check 
2 times daily 
7 
If plants have recovered from 
wilting days, remove shade cloth. 
(F) 
Plants should be recovering from 
wilting day(s) now.  Will most likely 
need to be watered by now.  Check 2 
times daily 
8 
Allow a small amount of 
ventilation around edges or ends 
reduce relative humidity. (F – with 
ventilation) 
Watch closely for watering.  
Check 1-2 times daily 

9 
Increase ventilation or clip poly 
film ½ way up to keep a “pocket” 
with increased relative humidity. 
(F – with ventilation) 
Watch closely for watering.  
Check 1-2 times daily 
10 
Remove film. Keep under shade 
cloth area in warm (east) 
greenhouse. 
Watch closely for watering.  
Check 1-2 times daily 
 
Manage Soil Moisture – During the first few days, the plants will not need any 
water.  However, once the graft unions start to form and as RH goes down, they will 
start to dry.  Oftentimes, this happens sporadically as individual plants heal, they 
will suddenly start using more water. You will need to watch for watering needs 
after days 3-4. Be very careful when watering so as to not damage the developing 
graft unions. Bottom-watering is best, but some careful overhead watering can be 
done.  
 
Manage Humidity – Relative humidity levels need to be kept above 65-70% 
through the first 7-8 days in order to keep scion tissue turgid. However, excessive 
moisture for an extended period of time will lead to disease and/or adventitious 
roots from the scion. Ideally, we like the humidity to be very high (>90%) for the 
first 48 hours and then reduced as much as possible without causing wilting after 
that and returned to ambient levels by day 10. The required RH to keep the plants 
from wilting will change through the timeline. 
 
Managing Light and Temperature – Balancing light requirements and reducing 
the transpiration stream of the scion is a difficult task. The plants benefit from some 
light throughout the process and light should be re-introduced as quickly as 
possible. However, too much light may heat up the chamber, and will stress the 
scion and lead to wilting.  On very cloudy (snowy/rainy) days, hardly any shade 
cloth is really needed and it is a good idea to remove a layer (or two) even early in 
the timeline. However, be sure to re-cover if ANY periods of sun or part-sun occur. If 
the chamber heats up too much (>90OF), especially during the hottest (sunniest) 
part of the day, water the plants and add fresh (cool) water to the bottom of the 
chamber to cool down the chamber. You may also add layers of shade cloth or foam 
board for several hours to shade the chamber. If the plants are further along (day 8-
9 or further) the chamber may be vented (plastic pulled back, shade cloth left on) 
for longer periods as well, though care should be taken not to dry the plants out too 
much. 
 
Post-Grafting Care 
After about seven days healing in the chamber, plants can be removed and place in 
full sun and low humidity. Take care not to disturb graft unions especially with 
overhead watering.  Consider using bottom watering or small spouted water can for 
a few days.  Plants should continue weekly liquid fertilizing schedule and slowly 
acclimated to lower night temperatures.   Allow plants at least 7-14 days of 

acclimation before planting in field or high tunnels.  Typically, the grafting clips will 
fall off on their own, however you will likely have to remove a few to prevent 
girdling the plant. When planting in the ground, make sure graft union is above the 
soil line.  Throughout the season check and prune any adventitious roots from the 
scion and sucker shoots from the rootstock. 
 
Troubleshooting 
 
Incompatibility - Incompatibility often 
results in graft failure and may be an 
immediate failure to heal during grafting, 
or delayed. Delayed incompatibility is 
often indicated by stunted plant growth 
and scion over or undergrowth (Figure 
8). Typically graft failure caused by 
incompatibility results from a poor or 
non-existent reconnection of the vascular 
bundles (which restricts the flow of 
water and nutrients). Because there is 
very little you can do after the fact, 
grafting incompatibility must be resolved 
before you graft by selecting compatible 
grafting partners. However, it should be 
noted that not all graft failure is a result 
of incompatibility, often grafts fail due to 
infection, physical damage, or poor 
grafting technique. 
 
Stretching of Stems or Folding of 
Leaves -  If the healing chamber is kept 
too dark for too long, the plants may 
begin to stretch, searching for light, or 
the leaves begin to curl, this can lead to plants with weak stems that are prone to 
lodging and breakage before making it to the field, if you notice these symptoms, 
remove as much shade cloth from the chamber as possible, or remove the plants 
from the chamber entirely if they are far enough along. 
 
Wilting – Wilting of the scion is common, and typically occurs on days 4-5 when the 
vascular tissue is reconnecting within the graft union, however, if the plants do not 
come out of this within a day or two, check for other possible causes such as 
overheating, drying, or media that is saturated, perhaps from sitting in a puddle 
within the chamber. If wilting occurs prior to days 4-5 the plants may also be 
receiving too much sunlight which can stress the scion. Rectify any of these issues 
quickly as severely wilted scions will often not survive. 
 
(Figure 8) Scion overgrowth (above) 
and undergrowth (below) in grafted bell 
pepper 

Edema – Edema is another physiological disorder that is characterized by a swelling 
of the leaves. This can occur in the healing chamber if the relative humidity is too 
high. If you see edema, do not throw away the affected plants, instead begin by 
reducing the relative humidity, and if the edema does not resolve, remove the 
affected plants from healing chamber as soon as possible. 
 
Adventitious Rooting – Perhaps the most common problem faced by those 
propagating grafted tomato plants is the formation of adventitious roots. If these 
roots are numerous enough and reach the soil they may cause total graft failure as 
the scion will abandon the rootstock in favor of its native roots. Even if the graft 
does not fail, adventitious roots may present a non-disease resistant route for soil-
borne pathogens to enter the plant, reducing or eliminating the benefit from a 
disease-resistant rootstock. While minimal adventitious rooting is normal, and not 
often problematic, the development of adventitious roots may be stimulated by 
keeping the plants in a high humidity environment (>85%) for too long, and can 
occur both inside the chamber and after removal. Monitoring the humidity is an 
important way to reduce the formation of adventitious roots, but the removal of 
scion leaves prior to grafting (as outlined earlier) can also have a highly beneficial 
effect. Research with grafted tomatoes has shown that removing 80-95% of the 
scion leaves improves grafting success rates, reduces water stress and significantly 
reduces the formation of adventitious roots. Keep in mind that such leaf removal 
does increase the time in the healing chamber by a couple of days. Typically, 
untrimmed plants require only about 7 days in the chamber, while plants with 
trimmed leaves will often require 10 days before they can be removed. Leaf removal 
is performed pre-emptively. So to avoid adventitious rooting becoming a problem 
for you, such leaf removal should be a part of your standard grafting protocol as 
outlined above. 
 
Pathogens (general) – As mentioned earlier, general sanitation of tools, work and 
growing spaces, and healing chamber materials, as well as the use of clean potting 
media and seed are important to reducing the risk of pathogen introduction or 
spread. It should also be noted that sickly plants should not be grafted, as they may 
become sources for infection once placed in the healing chamber. Since plant 
pathogens and newly-grafted plants flourish under similar environmental 
conditions (dark with high humidity), it is important to reduce the humidity to 55-
60% as soon as possible after the first 24-72 hours and allow the plants as much 
light as possible without causing significant wilting.