Typical foliar symptoms of tomato yellow leaf curl.
In March 2007, the virus that causes tomato 
yellow leaf curl was identiﬁed in greenhouse 
tomatoes from Imperial County. Because this 
disease is potentially devastating for tomato 
production in California, it is critical to limit its 
spread. This ﬂyer is intended to inform growers 
and PCAs about the disease, how to identify it, 
and what to do if they ﬁnd diseased plants.
Symptoms
Tomato plants infected with Tomato yellow leaf 
curl virus (TYLCV) are stunted, grow abnor-
mally upright, and take on a bushy appearance 
because internodes are shortened.
Tomato plant infected with Tomato yellow leaf curl 
virus.
Flowers on infected plants commonly fall off 
before fruit set and fruit production is dramati-
cally reduced. Losses can be 100% in ﬁelds with 
heavily infected plants.
Foliar (leaf) symptoms are the most diagnostic 
for this disease. Leaves of infected plants are 
small, strongly crumpled, curl upward, and turn 
yellow at the edges and between veins.
Host Range and Spread
TYLCV is a geminivirus, a family of viruses that 
are spread by whiteﬂies or leafhoppers. White-
ﬂy-transmitted geminiviruses are classiﬁed in 
the genus Begomovirus and infect certain broad-
leaf plants. Hosts of TYLCV include solanaceous 
crops (tomatoes, peppers, and some tobacco spe-
cies) and a range of weed species. Common bean 
is also a host for this virus and may develop leaf 
curl symptoms if infected. Many weed hosts 
do not develop symptoms, and it is not known 
how well whiteﬂies can acquire the virus from 
symptomless hosts. However, these hosts may 
allow the virus to survive in the absence of 
tomatoes, and may help the virus become per-
manently established. Tomato is by far the most 
Tomato Yellow Leaf Curl
A New Disease in California Tomatoes 
Robert L. Gilbertson and Maria Rojas,  
Department of Plant Pathology, UC Davis 
Eric Natwick, UC Cooperative Extension,  
Desert Research & Extension Center, Holtville
Prepared by the
University of California
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Statewide IPM Program
with support from the
California Tomato Research Institute, Inc.
and
California Tomato Growers Association, Inc.
Disease photos: Robert L. Gilbertson
Whiteﬂy photos: Jack Kelly Clark

Anyone ﬁnding tomatoes with TYLCV-like 
symptoms should contact:
• their local UC Cooperative Extension ofﬁce, 
or
• UCD pathologist Robert Gilbertson (530-
752-3163, rlgilbertson@ucdavis.edu), or
• CDFA scientist Tonyan Tian 
(916-262-1127, TTian@cdfa.ca.gov).
Management
CDFA has contained the initial outbreak of 
TYLCV and is monitoring tomatoes in commer-
cial ﬁelds, retail stores, and backyard gardens to 
determine the spread and establishment of the 
virus in southern California.
Should the virus become established, long-term 
approaches that may be needed are a tomato-
free period in Imperial County and a restriction 
on the movement of transplants from locations 
where TYLCV is known to occur to virus-free 
tomato-producing areas. TYLCV-resistant 
tomato varieties are available and an effective 
IPM program has been developed for the virus 
in areas where it is endemic.
However, there are a number of factors that may 
not favor establishment of the virus in the major 
tomato-producing areas of California, includ-
ing the Central Valley. First, Bemisia whiteﬂies 
are not typically found in these tomato-produc-
ing areas because the insect is intolerant of cold 
winter temperatures. Second, the winter season 
provides a “natural” tomato-free period, usually 
from late November through early February. 
This break would eliminate the primary host of 
the virus. Even if the virus were able to overwin-
ter in other (weed) hosts, it would probably do 
so inefﬁciently, thereby minimizing economic 
damage.
For more detail on management strategies, see 
the UC IPM Pest Management Guidelines: Tomato, 
available on the Web at www.ipm.ucdavis.edu.
Whiteﬂies acquire the virus by feeding at least 5 
to 10 minutes on an infected plant. After about 
10 hours they can spread the virus by feeding 
on uninfected plants for at least 5 to 10 minutes. 
Once whiteﬂies acquire the virus, they can infect 
plants for life, but they do not pass the virus to 
their progeny nor does the virus replicate in the 
insect.
TYLCV is spread over long distances by the 
movement of infected plants, especially tomato 
transplants, and by movement of virus-carry-
ing whiteﬂies either on host plants or by wind 
currents. Because infected plants may take up to 
3 weeks to develop symptoms, the virus can be 
spread in symptomless, infected transplants.
Origins
Tomato yellow leaf curl was ﬁrst described in 
Israel around 1940 and was known only in Old 
World locations until the early 1990s, when it 
was introduced into the Dominican Republic. It 
has since spread to other Caribbean islands, is 
now established in Florida, and has been found 
in Georgia, Louisiana, and North Carolina. 
A severe outbreak of TYLCV occurred in northern 
Mexico during the 2005-2006 season. In fall 2006, 
TYLCV was found in Texas and Arizona. The 
virus was ﬁrst identiﬁed in California in March 
2007, in diseased tomato plants from a non-
commercial greenhouse in Brawley, California. 
Researchers think these greenhouse plants were 
infected by whiteﬂies that acquired the virus from 
host plants outside the greenhouse, and that the 
virus most likely came from northern Mexico.
Identiﬁcation
Because the TYLCV symptoms can be confused 
with those caused by other viruses, symptoms 
alone cannot be used for deﬁnitive identiﬁca-
tion. Rapid, accurate tests for identifying the 
virus are available at UC Davis and the Cali-
fornia Department of Food and Agriculture 
(CDFA).
Adult Bemisia whiteﬂies fold their wings like a tent 
over their bodies. Nymphs (right) do not have a 
fringe of ﬁlaments around their edges.
Greenhouse whiteﬂies, Trialeurodes vaporariorum, 
occur commonly but are not vectors of TYLCV. 
Adults fold their wings ﬂat over their bodies. Older 
nymphs have long ﬁlaments. Younger nymphs 
(right) have a fringe of short ﬁlaments.
important TYLCV host; it will show diagnostic 
symptoms and be the key to the development of 
the disease in the ﬁeld. 
TYLCV is spread by the sweetpotato whiteﬂy, 
Bemisia tabaci biotype B (=silverleaf whiteﬂy, 
B. argentifolii), and other B. tabaci biotypes, but 
not by other whiteﬂy species. The virus is not 
transmitted in seed nor spread mechanically 
(e.g., by touch).