Bacterial Speck and 
Bacterial Spot in Tomatoes
Bacterial speck and spot are common bacterial diseases 
of tomatoes in the southeastern United States. 
Signs and Symptoms
Symptoms of bacterial speck can occur on leaves, stems, 
petioles, peduncles, pedicels, sepals, and fruit. Round, dark-
brown to black lesions develop on leaves infected with the 
bacterial speck pathogen; over time, a yellow halo may 
develop around leaf lesions (Figure 1). These lesions extend 
to both leaf surfaces but are more prominent on the lower 
leaf surface. Lesions on stems, petioles, peduncles, pedicels, 
and sepals tend to be more elongated. Small, dark lesions 
that are commonly flat or slightly raised develop on infected 
fruits; as fruits enlarge, these lesions become sunken or 
pitted (Figure 2). A dark green halo may also develop 
around fruit lesions (Figure 2). 
Symptoms of bacterial spot also can develop on all 
aboveground plant parts. Brown, circular lesions develop 
on leaves, stems, and fruit spurs. The tissue surrounding 
lesions on leaflets may become chlorotic (yellow) (Figure 
3). In some bacterial spot infections, leaves may have a 
shot-hole appearance. As lesions coalesce, the foliage 
becomes blighted and may defoliate or remain attached to 
the plant. Lesions on fruits begin as small, slightly raised 
blisters that grow and become scab-like (Figures 4 and 5). 
Bacterial spot can also occur on peppers, and symptoms on 
peppers are similar to those observed in tomatoes (Figures 
6 and 7).
In both bacterial speck and spot, lesions may coalesce 
to kill large areas of leaf tissue or cause streaking. Fruit 
lesions of bacterial spot tend to be rough compared 
to those of bacterial speck. However, the symptoms 
of bacterial speck and spot are very similar and may 
easily be confused with one another. Pathogen isolation 
and laboratory testing are often necessary to confirm a 
diagnosis. Symptoms associated with bacterial speck and 
spot on leaflets may also be confused with other diseases 
of tomatoes, such as early blight, gray leaf spot, and 
target spot.
Figure 1. Symptoms of bacterial speck on a tomato leaflet. Photo: Gerald 
Holmes, Cal Poly – San Luis Obispo, Bugwood.org.
Figure 2. Symptoms of bacterial speck on a tomato fruit. Photo: Gary E. Val­
lad, University of Florida, IFAS.

2
Figure 3. Symptoms of bacterial spot on a tomato leaflet. Photo: David B. 
Langston, University of Georgia, Bugwood.org.
Figure 4. Symptoms of bacterial spot on a tomato fruit. Photo: Ed Sikora, 
Auburn University, Bugwood.org.
Figure 5. Symptoms of bacterial spot on a tomato fruit. Photo: R. W. Sam­
son, Purdue University, Bugwood.org.
Figure 6. Symptoms of bacterial spot on a pepper leaf. Photo: Gerald 
Holmes, Cal Poly – San Luis Obispo, Bugwood.org.
Figure 7. Symptoms of bacterial spot on a pepper fruit. Photo: Howard F. 
Schwartz, Colorado State University, Bugwood.org.

3
Pathogen and Disease Spread
Bacterial speck is caused by the bacterium Pseudomonas 
syringae pv. tomato. This pathogen is seedborne and 
can overwinter in crop residue in temperate climates. 
Disease development is favored by high humidity and 
temperatures between 64°F and 75°F. 
Bacterial spot is caused by several species of 
Xanthomonas: X. vesicatoria, X. euvesicatoria, X. gardneri, and 
X. perforans. Xanthomonas perforans has been confirmed on 
tomatoes in Mississippi (Abrahamian et al., 2017). These 
pathogens can be spread by seed and can overwinter in 
crop residue. Disease development is favored by high 
precipitation, high humidity, and temperatures between 
75°F and 86°F.
The bacterial speck and bacterial spot pathogens can be 
spread easily during transplant production in greenhouses 
when plants are densely grown and watered overhead. 
These bacteria may survive on the surface of transplants 
without causing disease. These pathogens may also be 
spread by splashing water and wind-driven rain and on 
tools, machinery, and workers’ hands. The bacteria enter 
plants through natural openings and wounds. Volunteer 
tomatoes and, in the case of bacterial spot, peppers can 
serve as sources of inoculum.
Management 
Though it can be difficult to distinguish between 
bacterial speck and spot in tomatoes, the management 
practices for the diseases are very similar. 
Biological Management
Plant resistant varieties. Varieties with resistance/
tolerance to the bacterial speck pathogen are available. 
Check the latest edition of the Southeastern U.S. Vegetable 
Crop Handbook for resistant varieties that may be 
recommended for Mississippi. Varieties resistant to 
the bacterial spot pathogen are not currently available. 
Growers planting both tomatoes and peppers, however, 
can purchase and plant varieties of peppers that have 
resistance to the bacterial spot pathogen.
Cultural Management
Avoid overhead irrigation/watering and overwatering 
of transplants. The bacterial speck and spot pathogens 
can be spread easily in the greenhouse when plant density 
is high and plants are watered overhead. Minimize 
overwatering of transplants in the greenhouse and 
overhead watering when possible.
Avoiding excessive handling of transplants. Bacteria 
can easily be spread on tools and on workers’ hands. 
Avoid handling transplants more than necessary, 
especially when wet.  
Choose, prepare, and maintain an appropriate field for 
planting. Plant tomatoes in soil that drains well. Remove 
volunteer tomatoes and peppers from fields before 
planting and during crop rotation years when non-host 
crops are planted. 
Plow or disk fields. At the end of the season, plow or 
disk fields to bury crop debris. 
Practice crop rotation. In fields with bacterial speck 
and spot, 2-year (minimum) and 1-year crop rotations, 
respectively, are recommended.
Sanitation
Use disease-free seeds and plants. Purchase high-
quality, pathogen-free seeds from reputable seed sources. 
Use effective seed treatments to treat seeds. Seeds that 
have not been treated by the supplier should be treated 
with hot water, hydrochloric acid, or sodium hypochlorite. 
Additional information about seed treatments is available 
in the latest edition of the Southeastern U.S. Vegetable Crop 
Handbook.
Remove and destroy infected transplants. If bacterial 
speck or spot is detected in transplants in the greenhouse, 
infected transplants as well as those in neighboring trays 
should be removed and destroyed. 
Follow good sanitation practices when growing 
transplants. Wash hands after working with transplants. 
Regularly wash and disinfest pruning tools. Wash and 
sanitize tools, trays, equipment, surfaces, and greenhouse 
structures in between crops. 
Chemical Management
Apply bactericides that are effective against bacterial 
speck and spot. Numerous copper-based products (FRAC 
Group M01) are available for use against bacterial speck 
and spot on tomatoes and are labeled for use in Mississippi. 
However, resistance to copper is known to occur in bacteria 
causing bacterial spot. In 2017, copper resistance was 
identified in populations of Xanthomonas perforans in Jasper 
and Smith Counties in Mississippi (Abrahamian et al., 2019). 
The extent and distribution of copper resistance in this 
pathogen in Mississippi is not known. 
When pathogen resistance to copper is suspected, 
copper products should be tank-mixed with mancozeb 
(FRAC Group M05). Read the label to determine if 
tank-mixing a specific copper product with mancozeb is 
allowed. Alternatively, a product containing copper and 
mancozeb (FRAC Groups M01 + M05) can be applied. 
Another product, acibenzolar-S-methyl (FRAC 
Group 21; e.g., Actigard 50WG), is available for 

management of bacterial speck and spot and can 
be applied to healthy, actively growing plants. This 
product should be considered if copper resistance is 
known or suspected, but growers should keep in mind 
the 14-day pre-harvest interval (PHI) of acibenzolar-S-
methyl when choosing products for disease control.
Various biopesticides or fungicide alternatives are also 
available and labeled for use against bacterial speck and 
spot. See the Biopesticides, Fungicide, and Nematicide 
Alternatives for Vegetables table in the latest edition of the 
Southeastern U.S. Vegetable Crop Handbook for a list of these 
products.
Certain products may also be used preventively 
on transplants, in the greenhouse, or in organic tomato 
production. See the Greenhouse Disease Control for 
Various Vegetable Crops and the Biopesticides, Fungicide, 
and Nematicide Alternatives for Vegetables tables in 
the latest edition of the Southeastern U.S. Vegetable Crop 
Handbook for more information. Carefully read product 
labels and check with your organic certifier, when 
applicable, to ensure that a particular product is allowed in 
your particular production system.
When using fungicides, remember: the label is the 
law. You must completely read and understand product 
labels before use, and you must follow the label.
References
Abrahamian, P., Klein, J. M., Jones, J. B., Vallad, G. E., and 
Melanson, R. A. 2019. First report of bacterial spot of 
tomato caused by Xanthomonas perforans in Mississippi. 
Plant Disease 103(1):147. 
Jones, J. B., Zitter, T. A., Momol, T. M., and Miller, S. A. 
(eds). 2014. Compendium of tomato diseases and 
pests, 2nd edition. American Phytopathological Society 
Press, St. Paul, MN. 168 pages.
Lewis Ivey, M. L. 2015. Common names of plant 
diseases: Diseases of pepper (Capsicum L.). American 
Phytopathological Society. Online: http://apsnet.org/
publications/commonnames/Pages/default.aspx. 
Accessed: May 2, 2018.
Additional Resources
Choosing a Disinfectant for Tools and Surfaces in Horticultural 
Operations (IS1955),
http://extension.msstate.edu/publications/choosing-
disinfectant-for-tools-and-surfaces-horticultural-operations
Pesticide Label Databases (P3155), 
http://extension.msstate.edu/publications/publications/
pesticide-label-databases
Southeastern U.S. Vegetable Crop Handbook, available at 
http://www.vegcrophandbook.com.
This work is partially supported by Crop Protection and Pest Management, Extension Implementation Program grant no. 2017-70006-27200/project 
accession no. 1014037 from the USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed 
in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
The information given here is for educational purposes only. References to commercial products, trade names, or suppliers are made with the 
understanding that no endorsement is implied and that no discrimination against other products or suppliers is intended.
Publication 3361 (POD-03-20)
By Rebecca A. Melanson, PhD, Assistant Extension Professor, Plant Pathology, Central Mississippi Research and Extension Center.
Reviewed by Clarissa Balbalian, Diagnostic Laboratory Manager, MSU Extension; Shien Lu, PhD, Professor, Plant Pathology, MAFES; Kelby King, 
Jasper County ANR Extension Agent, MSU Extension; and Gary E. Vallad, Associate Professor, Plant Pathology, University of Florida, IFAS.
Copyright 2020 by Mississippi State University. All rights reserved. This publication may be copied and distributed without 
alteration for nonprofit educational purposes provided that credit is given to the Mississippi State University Extension Service.
Produced by Agricultural Communications.
Mississippi State University is an equal opportunity institution. Discrimination in university employment, 
programs, or activities based on race, color, ethnicity, sex, pregnancy, religion, national origin, disability, age, 
sexual orientation, genetic information, status as a U.S. veteran, or any other status protected by applicable law 
is prohibited. Questions about equal opportunity programs or compliance should be directed to the Office of 
Compliance and Integrity, 56 Morgan Avenue, P.O. 6044, Mississippi State, MS 39762, (662) 325-5839.
Extension Service of Mississippi State University, cooperating with U.S. Department of Agriculture. Published in 
furtherance of Acts of Congress, May 8 and June 30, 1914. GARY B. JACKSON, Director