CROP CONDITIONS
We have received many complaints from growers that even their cool season 
crops have not germinated well or that transplants have just been sitting 
in the field without much growth. If you have been experiencing this, you 
are not alone.  Soil temperatures from data loggers buried 4-6” deep in rye/
vetch cover crop all over Massachusetts showed remarkably similar results 
(figure next page). Temperatures were recorded hourly for a period from 
April 20th until May 26th, when most cover crops were incorporated and the 
data loggers were removed, then replaced after tillage. There was a two and 
a half week period from April 30th - May17th when soil temperatures re-
mained below 60°F. Most vegetables (except for lettuce and turnip) require 
10 days or more to germinate at soil temperatures below 60°F. One observa-
tion we found surprising was that soil temperatures could fluctuate by 10°F 
or more in one day, though the effect that has on crop growth is unknown. 
Also, the Amherst location had slightly higher soil temperatures--this is 
likely due to the short and sparse cover crop growth, leaving the soil surface 
exposed and able to heat up more.
We’ve been busy planting (and waiting like the rest of you) too, with many 
trials planned or underway on topics including:  nitrogen mineralization 
from cover crops to meet cash crop demand; cabbage maggot control in 
direct-seeded brassicas; sentinel plot for cucurbit downy mildew; efficacy 
and economics of using disease-resistant cucumber varieties for fall produc-
tion; conserving natural enemies for biocontrol of cabbage aphid; efficacy 
of alternative insecticides to control cabbage aphids; evaluating new fun-
gicides for disease control in fall brassicas; and wrapping up a mustard 
biofumigation study for management of root knot nematode.
We will also be continuing a collaboration with researchers at Cornell Uni-
versity who are studying movement of potato virus Y between crops, fields, 
and farms. We are looking for a few more sampling sites in the Pioneer Val-
ley where tomato, potato and pepper are being grown in close proximity…
do you know of any such places?! We would just ask for access to the fields, 
a list of the varieties planted and a field map and we do the rest—the sam-
pling consists of us walking through each crop and taking a small leaf tissue 
sample from about 300 plants/crop at 4-5 timepoints throughout the season.  
If you are able to help us find another location or two to sample we’d love to 
hear from you, just write to Sue Scheufele: sscheufele@umass.edu
PEST ALERTS
Allium: 
Onion thrips are now present in Franklin and Hampshire Cos., MA in transplanted onions. Thrips overwinter as adults 
in crop remnants, alfalfa, wheat, greenhouses, and weeds along the border of crop fields. A widely used threshold is 
IN THIS ISSUE:
Crop Conditions
Pest Alerts
The ‘Other Blights’ of Tomato
Watch Now For Thrips in Onion
Events
Sponsors
Growers at the UMass student farm were able 
to get Surround to mix well using a sheetrock 
drill and removing the screen/filter from their 
nozzleheads. This should provide early season 
protection against striped cucumber beetle.
Photo: A. Brown
Volume 29, Number 8
June 1, 2017

1-3 thrips per leaf. Development time (base temperature of 52.7°F) is 140 GDD for egg, 180 GDD for larva (2 instars), 
and a total of 323 GDD for each generation. At summer temperatures, a generation can be completed in 2-3 weeks 
and numbers of adults increase as the season progresses.  The product Movento had good efficacy in trials conducted 
at Cornell for the earliest applications in the season because it has efficacy against nymphs. It must be applied with a 
penetrating surfactant to be absorbed by the onion leaves.
Beets and Swiss Chard:
Cercospora leaf spot was observed on Swiss chard in Hampshire Co., MA. This fungal disease thrives in wet, moist, 
warm (75°F) conitions and spores are spread by rain, splashing water, and wind. The fungus survives in the soil for 
two years so rotation is an important tool. Control related weed hosts e.g. lambsquarter’s which can also be infected. 
Strobilurin fungicides are effective against this disease but should be mixed with protectant fungicides like copper, 
many of which are also labeled, and used in rotations with other FRAC groups to delay development of resistance. 
Fontelis (FRAC Group 7) and Tilt (FRAC Group 3) are also labeled.
Cucurbits: 
Seed corn maggot second generation appears to be causing damage in a Hamden 
Co., MA field which is at about 980 GDD base 40°F now (Table 1). There may be 
2-3 generations in New England with second generation peak flight at 1,080 GDD 
base 40F. The larvae of the first is the most damaging, though with prolonged cool 
weather, the second generation may also cause problems (Fig. 2). 
Striped cucumber beetle is present in recently transplanted cucurbit fields in RI 
and MA.  Numbers have reached threshold of 1-2 beetles/plant in high tunnels in 
Hampshire Co., MA. An action threshold of 1 to 2 beetles per plant is recommend-
ed.  The UMass student farm devised a way to get good coverage with Surround 
(kaolin clay) to protect their seedlings from SCB (see cover photo).
Squash vine borer traps have been set out at 3 farms in MA and will go out in NH 
over the next 2 weeks. This pest overwinters as pupae in the field and has histori-
cally emerged in early June, sometimes with 2 generations per year. Traps are 
usually placed in summer squash and zucchini. 2nd-3rd plantings are usually hit the 
Fig 2. Seedcorn maggot infestation in 
giant pumpkin in Hillsborough CO., NH 
photo: G. Hamilton. 
Fig. 1 Soil temperatures in rye/vetch cover crop in 6 vegetable fields in Massachusetts
2

hardest since growers are no longer using protective covers 
or covers are removed when the crop is flowering for pol-
lination. Use a treatment threshold of 5 moths per week in 
the pheromone trap targeting sprays at the base of the plant.
Eggplant and Potato: 
Flea Beetle  is causing significant damage on eggplant trans-
plants in a greenhouse in Middlesex Co., MA and on seed-
lings in the field in Hampshire Co., MA. There two major 
flushes of adults – one in late-May and early-June, and the 
second from mid-July to mid-August. Treat newly set trans-
plants if they have 2 flea beetles per plant, seedlings 3” to 6” 
tall if they have greater than 4 beetles per plant, and plants 
over 6” tall if they have 8 beetles per plant. Full size plants 
rarely require treatment for flea beetles.
Colorado potato beetle emergence continues with egg-
laying starting to occur in some areas. Treatment should be 
considered in the following scenarios: 
•	 10% defoliation
•	 Adults: 25 beetles/50 plants
•	 Small larvae: 4/plant
•	 Large larvae: 1.5/plant or stalk, based on a count of 50 
plants/stalks
Sweetcorn: 
European corn borer The first NY (E strain) adult moths have been captured at 
4 out of 11 sites in NH, 3 sites in NY, and at one location in MA (Table 2). Adult 
emergence occurs at (374 GDD), first eggs (450 GDD), and peak flight (631 GDD) 
base 50°F. Adult flight has begun in some parts of MA (Table 1), so farmers with 
emerged corn should put out traps this week to make sure they are ready to capture 
the first adults.
Common armyworm was found heavily infesting 4” tall corn in Ulster Co., NY.  
While this is fairly abnormal, the same pest was found in Franklin Co., MA last 
year. While this pest is not very widespread, when it does occur it can be fairly 
damaging. It’s host range is broad, including field crops, cover crops, small grains 
and almost any vegetable crop including lettuce, sweet corn, brassicas, tomatoes, 
peppers etc. This pest overwinters south of PA in field residue and flies north in 
late-May to early- June. Don’t rely on trap captures alone for spraying your sweet 
corn—walking through early corn fields now is a 
good idea and will help you catch and stay ahead 
of other potential corn pests like this one. Treat 
if 50% of the crop has feeding damage, frass or 
other signs of infestation. According to Chuck 
Bornt of Eastern NY Extension: “Best control 
is achieved when the larvae are small (1st and 2nd instar). There are a number of 
insecticides labeled for armyworm including organic products Pyganic, Dipel, and 
Entrust. There are also a number of conventional insecticides labeled for army-
worm control including Warrior, Baythroid (both are recommended for 1st and 2nd 
instars), Coragen and Lannate.” 
Fig 2. Common armyworm in 3rd or 4th 
instar. 
Photo: K. Campbell-Nelson
Table 1. Accumulated Growing Degree Days: 
 1/1/17 - 6/1/17
Location
GDD          
(base 40°F)
GDD        
(base 50°F)
Western, MA
 
 
Ashfield
805
274
South Deerfield
932
343
Pittsfield
825
289
Central, MA
 
 
Bolton
959
368
Northbridge
955
359
Phillipston
816
279
Eastern, MA
 
 
Ipswich
907
319
Waltham
1020
390
Seekonk
1104
407
Hollis, NH
944
367
Burlington, VT
936
374
Newport, RI
978
301
Castleton, NY
1106
444
Table 2. ECB trap 
catches
Location
ECB 
Weekly 
Total
Western, MA
 
Whately
1
Central, MA
 
Leominster
0 
Eastern, MA
 
Dover
0
Millis
0
Sharon
0
NH
 
Litchfield
0
Hollis
1
Mason
0
3

THE ‘OTHER BLIGHTS’ OF TOMATO 
While late blight has become the dominant force in tomato disease management, it is certainly not the only foliar leaf 
blight around. In fact, there was not a single confirmation of late blight in Massachusetts last year. We have not seen any 
late blight so far this year, but recent weather has been conducive for this oomycete disease to thrive if inoculum were 
present. There are several fungi and a few bacteria that cause leaf spots and defoliation as well (some of these have been 
reported in greenhouse and high tunnel production already this year). A few key fungal diseases are described below.
Septoria leaf spot (Septoria lycopersici) is one of the most destructive diseases of 
tomato foliage, resulting in considerable leaf drop that can cause sunscald, failure 
of fruit to mature properly, and reduced yields. Once infections begin, the disease 
can spread rapidly from lower leaves to the upper tomato canopy. 
Symptoms consist of circular, tan to grey lesions with a dark brown margin that 
appear on lower leaves first, after the first fruit set. If conditions are favorable, 
lesions can enlarge rapidly, turning infected leaves yellow, then brown. S. lycop-
ersici forms pycnidia (structures where asexual spores are formed) in the center of 
expanding lesions which can be seen with a 10X hand lens as tiny black dots. The 
presence of pycnidia, plus the generally smaller size of the lesions and the absence 
of target-like circular bands within the lesion, distinguish this disease from early 
blight. 
The pathogen overwinters on infected tomato debris or infected solanaceous weed 
hosts (jimsonweed, horsenettle, groundcherry and black nightshade), and can also survive on stakes and other equip-
ment. Tomato seed may be coated in spores. Once established, Septoria is spread by splashing water, insects, workers, and 
equipment. High humidity, long periods of leaf wetness, and temperatures of 60- 80°F are conducive to disease develop-
ment.
Early blight (Alternaria solani) occurs on the foliage, stem, and fruit of tomato as 
well as potato. In tomato, the disease first appears as small brown to black lesions 
with yellow haloes on older foliage. Under conducive conditions, numerous lesions 
may occur on each leaf causing entire leaves to become chlorotic (yellow). As the 
lesions enlarge, they often develop concentric rings giving them a ‘bull’s eye’ or 
‘target-spot’ appearance. As the disease progresses, plants can become defoliated, 
reducing both fruit quantity and quality. Fruit can become infected either in the 
green or ripe stage.  Infections usually occur through the stem attachment. Fruit 
lesions appear leathery and may have the same characteristic concentric rings as the 
foliage.  Fruit lesions can become quite large, encompassing the whole fruit.  
On potato, foliar symptoms are quite similar, though complete defoliation rarely 
results. Tuber lesions are dark, sunken, and circular often bordered by a purple to 
gray raised tissue. The underlying flesh is dry, leathery, and brown. Lesions can 
increase in size during storage and tubers become shriveled.
The fungus overwinters on infected crop debris in the soil and can survive there several years.  High humidity and warm 
temperatures (75-85°F) favor infection and disease development. Production of spores requires long periods of leaf wet-
ness but can occur during alternating periods of wet and dry.  Spores are dispersed mainly by wind but also by splashing 
water or overhead irrigation.
Septoria and Early Blight Management. Some tomato and potato varieties with early blight resistance or tolerance are 
available, however, most tomato cultivars are susceptible to Septoria leaf spot. Adequate nitrogen fertility throughout the 
season can help delay onset of early blight; lower leaves become more susceptible as the nitrogen demand increases with 
fruit production and nitrogen is pulled from older leaves. Preventative fungicide sprays at regular intervals (depending 
on weather conditions and disease pressure) will delay onset. Rotate out of tomato crops for at least two years, control 
susceptible weeds, and incorporate debris after harvest. Reduce the length of time that tomato foliage is wet by using drip 
Early Blight photo: IPM images
Septoria photo: S. Scheufele
4

irrigation, usinge wider plant spacing, and staking. Keep workers and equipment 
out of wet fields where possible. 
Many fungicides are registered and effective against both early blight and Septoria, 
please see the New England Vegetable Guide for recommendations. Use the NEWA 
Tomato forecasting model to help with the timing of fungicide applications for 
early blight and Septoria.
Botrytis Grey Mold & /Ghost Spot (Botrytis cinerea). Botrytis cinerea causes 
leaf spots, stem cankers, fruit rot, and ghost spot on fruit. The pathogen thrives 
in the greenhouse where humidity is very high, but it has been observed in field 
tomatoes as well.  Leaf lesions are dark gray and have no yellow halo, and there-
fore are often mistaken for late blight lesions. Under conditions of alternating heat 
and humidity, the pathogen grows in such a way as to form concentric rings, and 
for this reason can be confused with early blight. The way to tell it apart is by its 
characteristic fuzzy brownish-gray sporulation. If you hold the leaf up and look 
across the lesion you will see fine mycelia sticking up with little tuftlets on the 
end that resemble grape clusters.  B. cinerea primarily feeds on dead tissue and is 
only weakly pathogenic, therefore, you will likely see this sporulation on senescent 
tissue including flowers or leaf tips and margins where nutritional disorders have 
caused tip burn. Spores that land on fruit cause ghost spot, which appears as pale 
white haloes or ring spots on the green tomato fruit. On ripe fruit, the ringspots 
may be yellow. Ghost spot develops when the fungus initiates infection, but disease 
progress is stopped by dry environmental conditions. This spotting may adversely 
affect market quality. Under favorable conditions ghost spot may lead to fruit rot. 
Leaf Mold (Fulvia fulva). This disease can occur in the field, but is most com-
mon in greenhouses, in both soilless and hydroponic systems. Leaf mold infections 
begin on older leaves and cause pale-green to yellow spots visible on the upper leaf 
surface, with olive-green to grayish-purple fuzzy growth on the underside of the 
leaf where the fungus is producing spores. Heavily infected leaves turn yellow, then 
brown and may wither and drop. Occasionally petioles, stems, and fruit may be 
affected. Infected flowers wither without setting fruit and infected fruit has leathery, 
black, irregularly shaped lesions.  
The fungus overwinters in soil on crop residue and as sclerotia (hard, black, long-
lived resting structures) and may be introduced on infested seed.  Disease devel-
opment is favored by warm, moist conditions with relative humidity over 85%.  
The fungus can survive and reproduce between 50-95°F, with optimal infection 
and growth between 71-75°F. The disease can spread rapidly as spores disperse 
throughout a greenhouse on air currents, water, rainsplash, insects, and workers. 
Powdery mildew (Oidium neolycopersici) of tomato has emerged as an important 
disease of greenhouse and high-tunnel tomatoes, and is occasionally seen in field 
tomatoes. Look for white, powdery, circular lesions on the upper and lower leaf 
surfaces. Unlike other powdery mildews, affected leaves may rapidly wither and 
die, but remain attached to the stem. There are no symptoms on fruit or stems, but 
loss of foliage may result in sunscald. The pathogen does not require free water to 
germinate and cause disease but it does thrive under humid conditions and a range 
of temperatures (50-86°F).  This pathogen can be very aggressive and lead to re-
duced yield and poor fruit flavor if untreated.
Botrytis, Leaf Mold and Powdery Mildew Management: These are primar-
ily diseases in greenhouses because of environment, so reducing humidity and 
improving airflow are key. Control weeds and remove plant debris.  Space plants 
Powdery Mildew photo: S. Scheufele
Leaf Mold top and bottom of leaf
 photos: Cornell Extension
Botrytis photo: D. Ingram
5

and sucker them or remove lower leaves to allow good air circulation, reduce humidity within the canopy, and minimize 
leaf wetness by watering with drip irrigation or early in the day.  In the greenhouse, improve horizontal air flow with fans, 
and reduce humidity by a combination of heating and venting in the evening, particularly when warm days are followed 
by cool nights. Avoid excessive nitrogen fertilization. Remove all diseased plant residues and destroy them; disinfest the 
entire greenhouse after harvest. Practice hot water seed treatment for tomatoes as a general rule. For Fulvia in particular 
there are a few products labeled for use on indoor tomato to control this disease.  Choose resistant varieties. See this fact 
sheet from Cornell for a list of resistant varieties.
Please see the New England Vegetable Management Guide (www.nevegetable.org) for current management recommen-
dations.  Always alternate fungicide applications between materials with different modes of action to prevent resistance 
development.  
-Bess Dicklow and Susan B. Scheufele, UMass Extension
WATCH FOR THRIPS IN ONION
We are now seeing onion thrips (Thrips tabaci) in onions here in Western MA. This pest prefers hot, dry conditions, so 
we may not see rapid build-up this week with more rain in the forecast, but it is a good idea to start scouting and manage 
populations before they get out of hand. This UMass Scouting Sheet for alliums can help you keep track of your scouting 
and guide your decision-making. The host range of onion thrips is wide, including many vegetable families, field crops 
such as alfalfa, wheat, oat and tobacco, weeds including amaranth, goldenrod, ragweed and sunflower, and ornamentals 
such as roses, but onions are their preferred host and where they cause the most economic damage.  Cabbage may be 
infested at any time in the season, but the most common thrips damage in brassicas in New England occurs later in the 
season on fall transplants.  Succulent peas are sensitive to thrips feeding damage, and onion thrips can also cause damage 
in greenhouse tomato and cucumber. 
Identification and life cycle. Onion thrips are tiny, slender insects that range in color from translucent to yellow to brown 
and are only 1/16” in length. They spend the winter as adults in crop remnants, alfalfa, wheat, greenhouses and weeds 
along the border of crop fields. Early spring reproduction can occur in field crops, especially wheat, before movement 
into onion. Adults insert eggs singly into plant tissue, adults and nymphs feed on leaves, and pupation occurs in the soil 
near the plant. Development time (base temperature of 52.7°F) is 140 GDD for egg, 180 GDD for larva (2 instars), and a 
total of 323 GDD for each generation. At summer temperatures, a generation can be completed in 2-3 weeks. Thrips have 
rasping mouth parts which they use to tear open plant cells to feed on plant juices. 
Damage. In onions, damage is caused by adults and nymphs piercing cells and removing cell contents along leaf blades. 
Symptoms are irregular, blotchy whitening of the leaves (known as ‘blast’), and if feeding is heavy, leaf curling or twist-
ing and overall stunting of plant growth can occur. The result is reduced bulb size and lower overall yields, or if severe 
enough, plant death. Feeding that occurs during bulb formation and rapid bulb expansion has the most effect on yield. 
Scallions are particularly sensitive because the whole plant is marketed. In addition to direct injury, thrips damage can 
increase occurrence of purple blotch (Alternaria porri) and other bacterial diseases, as wounds caused by feeding allow 
for easy entry by pathogens. Thrips also vector the iris yellow spot virus which affects many allium crops. 
Monitoring. Scout plants along field margins where infestations build early, as well as checking across the field. Scout 
weekly to determine if populations are increasing. Look closely between the leaf blades, especially in the center of the 
plant around the growing tip, to find the light yellow nymphs or darker adults. Though tiny, you can see the slender, yel-
low nymphs moving about on the leaf when the leaves are parted. Count number per plant and note number of leaves per 
plant to determine if thresholds are reached. The number that constitutes an economic threshold varies with the stage of 
plant growth, efficacy of insecticide to be used, water availability, and health of the plants. A widely used threshold is 1-3 
thrips per leaf or 30 per plant. 
Cultural practices can reduce thrips numbers by delaying or inhibiting their establishment in the crop, or by reducing 
survival. These include: 
•	Incorporate or remove crop residue at the end of the season.
6

•	Rotate into fields where no alliums or brassicas were grown for the past 2 years.
•	Avoid planting onions or cabbage near alfalfa, wheat or clover; thrips may migrate to onions when these crops reach 
maturity or are cut and harvested.  
•	Avoid importing plants or sets from other farms or regions, or using last year’s onions for sets.
•	Maintain sanitation and scout regularly in the greenhouse to avoid thrips on transplants.
•	Use straw mulch, which has been shown to slow population buildup.
•	Alternate onion rows with carrot rows, which has been shown to reduce thrips in onion
•	Use reflective plastic mulch.
•	Provide adequate water for onion growth: onions need consistent, adequate moisture, and dry soil conditions worsen 
the effects of feeding damage. 
•	Heavy rain or overhead irrigation can lower populations (but may increase risk of foliar disease).
•	Use selective insecticides to conserve minute pirate and insidious flower bugs, which are the most effective predators, 
as well as other natural enemies.  
Chemical Control: Thrips move from the protected growing tip up the leaves during the evening, so that’s the best time 
to spray. Use moderate to high pressure, 100 gal water/A, and appropriate nozzle spacing to achieve the best possible cov-
erage. Wetting agents or spreader-stickers are strongly recommended so that insecticides don’t quickly wash off the waxy 
foliage.  If repeat applications are needed, use a 7 to 10 day spray interval. Use a shorter interval in hot weather. Rotate 
between insecticide groups after 2 applications to help prevent resistance. Note that products labeled for thrips control are 
not exactly the same for onions and Brassicas and dry bulb onions and fresh eating onions are often labeled differently. 
Please see the New England Management Guide for control options, there are many effective materials for conventional 
and organic growers alike. Always read the label carefully before applying any pesticide.
- UMass Extension Vegetable Program. Updated for 2017 by L. McKeag.
EVENTS
Small Vegetable Farm Equipment Field Day
When: Friday, June 2, 2017, 2 PM – 6:00 PM (Pizza at 6:00 PM)
Where:Oxen Hill Farm Field, Corner of Quarry and Phelps Rd., W. Suffield, CT
Oxen Hill Farm, owned and managed by Jonathan Griffin and family, is a 150-acre certified organic farm that has 
a nice variety of cultivators and other equipment that they will demo. They just built a brand new barn and cooler 
system. They are also distributors for the Italian small farm equipment made by Checchi & Magli including: single-
row potato planters and harvesters, transplanters and plastic mulch layers; double-row potato hillers and veg crop 
transplanters.  The Quarry Road field has a large variety of crops grown on plastic, bare-ground and under plastic 
(1,400-foot-long caterpillar tunnels) and uses landscape cloth between plastic beds on tomatoes for weed control. 
Trevor Hardy, from Brookdale Fruit Farm, will give a brief presentation on “Setting Up Your First Irrigation System.” 
Equipment Dealers from around the region will display and demo a variety of large and small machines and hand 
tools. 
Sponsored by: USDA’s Beginning Farmers Program, Oxen Hill Farm, UConn Extension and the equipment dealers listed 
above.
UConn is an Equal Opportunity program provider and employer. Please contact us two weeks in advance if special accommoda-
tions are required. 
Water Management Twilight Meeting
When: Wednesday, June 28, 2017 from 4pm-6pm with dinner to follow!!
Where: Tangerini’s Spring Street Farm, 139 Spring St, Millis, MA 02054
7

FSMA and drought got you down? Come to this Twilight Meeting at Tangerini Farm in Millis, MA. Tour the newly 
installed irrigation system for orchard and vegetable crops built with funding support from NRCS with the designer, 
Trevor Hardy of Brookdale Farm, Irrigation and Row Crop Supply. Find out water sampling protocols and lab require-
ments for FSMA from the UMass Food Safety Specialist Lisa McKeag and about grant opportunities for irrigation 
and food safety improvements.  Other industry representatives will be available for consultation and dinner will be 
provided following the tour. 
We will cover: irrigation water sources, sampling for FSMA requirements, ins-and-outs of drip irrigation, overhead 
irrigation in corn, strawberry and direct seeded crops, irrigation under FSMA, and orchard irrigation.
THANK YOU TO OUR SPONSORS
8
Vegetable Notes. Katie Campbell-Nelson, Lisa McKeag, Susan Scheufele, co-editors.  
Where trade names or commercial products are used, no company or product endorsement is implied or intended.  Always 
read the label before using any pesticide.  The label is the legal document for product use.  Disregard any information in this 
newsletter if it is in conflict with the label.
The University of Massachusetts Extension is an equal opportunity provider and employer, United States Department of 
Agriculture cooperating. Contact your local Extension office for information on disability accommodations. Contact the State 
Center Directors Office if you have concerns related to discrimination, 413-545-4800.