Tomato diseases and disorders | Diseases in outdoor production
1
PM 1266   Revised   August 2006
by Mark L. Gleason and Brooke A. Edmunds,
Department of Plant Pathology
Tomatoes are the most popular vegetable crop in Iowa.
Many diseases and disorders can affect tomatoes during
the growing season. This publication describes the symp-
toms and management of common problems found in
gardens and greenhouses.
Diseases in outdoor production
This section looks at the diseases common in outdoor
gardens.
Septoria leaf spot
Septoria leaf spot, caused by the fungus Septoria
lycopersici, is the most common foliar disease of tomatoes
in Iowa. It first appears as small, water-soaked spots that
soon become circular spots about 1⁄8 inch in diameter
(Figure 1). The lesions gradually develop grayish white
centers with dark edges (Figure 2). The light-colored
centers of these spots are the most distinctive symptom of
Septoria leaf spot. When conditions are favorable, fungal
fruiting bodies appear as tiny black specks in the centers
of the spots. Spores are spread to new leaves by splashing
rain. Heavily infected leaves turn yellow, wither, and
eventually fall off. Lower leaves are infected first, and
the disease progresses upward if rainy weather persists.
Defoliation can be severe after periods of prolonged warm,
wet weather (Figure 3). Infection can occur at any stage
Figure 1. Septoria leaf spot symptoms
Figure 2. Septoria leaf spot; the light colored centers
distinguish them from leaf spots caused by bacterial spot
and speck
of plant development but appears most frequently after
plants have begun to set fruit. The fungus survives the
winter in tomato debris.
To control Septoria leaf spot a combination of cultural
practices is often needed. These practices, which also
will help to reduce the risk of many other diseases,
include the following:
 Plant disease-free transplants far enough apart that the
plants will not be crowded after they are full grown, in
order to help the foliage dry rapidly.
Tomato diseases
and disorders

2
Tomato diseases and disorders | Diseases in outdoor production
 Water at the base of the plants, and in the morning
rather than the evening, to minimize the amount of time
that the leaves are wet.
 Remove as much plant debris as possible in the fall and
promptly plow under or bury the remaining residue.
 Rotate crops so that tomatoes are grown in the same
ground only every three or four years.
 Avoid working with plants when foliage is wet to avoid
spreading disease-causing microorganisms.
Fungicides also can help to control Septoria leaf spot.
Consult ISU Extension bulletin Insects and Diseases in the
Home Vegetable Garden (PM 230) for current fungicide
recommendations.
Early blight
Early blight, caused by the fungus Alternaria solani, is also
known as Alternaria leaf spot or target spot. Like Septoria
leaf spot, early blight is common in Iowa tomato
plantings, and the two diseases may attack the same
plants. Premature loss of lower leaves is the most obvious
symptom of the disease (Figure 3). Brown to black spots,
1⁄4 to 1⁄2 inch in diameter with dark edges, appear on lower
leaves (Figure 4). Spots frequently merge, forming
irregular blotches. Dark, concentric rings often appear
in leaf spots, resulting in the “target” appearance
suggested by the common name. Leaves turn yellow and
dry up when only a few spots are present. The fungus
occasionally attacks fruit at the stem end, causing large,
sunken areas with concentric rings and a black, velvety
appearance (Figure 5). Warm, wet weather favors rapid
spread of early blight. A. solani also can infect potato. Like
Septoria leaf spot, early blight can infect plants at any
stage during the growing season but usually progresses
most rapidly after plants have set fruit.
Cultural and chemical controls for early blight are the
same as for Septoria leaf spot. In addition, avoid potato
in rotations, and harvest all ripe fruit at every picking to
avoid infecting other fruit. Resistant varieties of tomatoes
in the Mountain series (Mountain Supreme, Pride, Gold,
Fresh, and Belle) provide partial resistance to early blight.
Figure 4. Early blight rot on foliage
Figure 5. Early blight symptoms on fruit
Figure 3. Defoliation caused by both Septoria leaf spot
and early blight

Tomato diseases and disorders | Diseases in outdoor production
3
Anthracnose
Anthracnose, caused by the fungus Colletotrichum
coccodes, is probably the most common fruit-attacking
disease of tomato in Iowa. Symptoms first become visible
on ripe or ripening fruit as small, circular, indented spots
in the skin. As these spots expand, they develop dark
centers or concentric rings of dark specks, which are the
spore-producing bodies of the fungus (Figure 6). In moist
weather these bodies exude large
numbers of spores, giving
diseased areas a cream to salmon-
pink color. By this stage, decay
has penetrated deeply into the
tomato flesh. Spotted fruits often
may rot completely because of
attack by secondary fungi
through anthracnose spots.
Anthracnose appears most
commonly on overripe fruits.
The fungus survives the winter on diseased tomato vines,
in the soil, and in seeds. Weeks before the fruit ripens,
anthracnose can become established on leaf spots caused
by other fungi or by insect feeding injuries. Spores are
spread largely by rain splash. Warm, wet weather causes
the disease to spread and symptoms to develop. While
insect or other wounds facilitate infection, tomatoes can
also become infected in the absence of wounds.
Control measures for anthracnose are the same as
for Septoria leaf spot. In addition, harvest at frequent
intervals and pick all ripe fruit at each harvest.
Fusarium wilt
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici, the fungus that
causes Fusarium wilt, attacks only certain tomato culti-
vars. Plants infected by this soil-dwelling fungus show
leaf yellowing and wilting that progress upward from the
base of the stem. Initially, only one side of a leaf midrib,
one branch, or one side of a plant will be affected. The
symptoms soon spread to the remainder of the plant
(Figure 7). Wilted leaves usually drop prematurely.
Affected plants die early and produce few, if any, fruit.
Splitting open an infected stem reveals brownish streaks
extending up and down the stem (Figure 8). These
discolored streaks are the water-conducting tissue, which
becomes plugged during attack by the fungus, leading to
wilting of the leaves. Plants are susceptible at all stages of
development, but symptoms are most obvious at or soon
after flowering.
Figure 6. Anthracnose fruit rot
Figure 7. Fusarium wilt
To minimize losses
from Fusarium wilt,
it is advisable to plant
resistant varieties,
and many resistant
varieties are available.
The letter “F” following
the variety name
indicates resistance
to one or more races of
the Fusarium fungus.
Resistant varieties may
become infected, but
disease will not be as
severe as with susceptible
varieties and a reasonable yield should still be obtained.
In addition, plant disease-free seed or transplants in well-
drained, disease-free soil, rotate at least four years away
from tomatoes to reduce populations of the fungus in soil,
and remove and destroy infected plant residue. In green-
house or seedbeds, disinfest soil by treating with steam.
Figure 8. Vascular browning caused by
Fusarium wilt

4
Tomato diseases and disorders | Diseases in outdoor production
Figure 10. Late blight symptoms on leaflet
Figure 11. Fruit rot caused by late blight
Verticillium wilt
Verticillium albo-atrum and Verticillium dahliae, the fungi
that cause Verticillium wilt, can attack more than 200
plant species, including potato, pepper, eggplant, straw-
berry, watermelon, and radish. Like Fusarium wilt, this
disease appears first on the lower leaves and progresses
upward. Yellow blotches develop on lower leaves; the
leaves rapidly turn completely yellow, wither, and drop
off (Figure 9). Unlike Fusarium wilt, symptoms of
Verticillium wilt do not progress along one side of a
leaflet, branch, or plant. Infected plants may survive
through the growing season, but are stunted and yield
is reduced. Verticillium wilt, like Fusarium wilt, causes
internal browning of the water-conducting tissue in
stems (Figure 9). The discolora-
tion is most pronounced near
the soil line and seldom extends
more than 10 to 12 inches above
this point.
Control measures are similar to
those for Fusarium wilt. Names
of Verticillium-resistant tomato
cultivars are followed by the
letter “V.” Rotate away from all
crops in the tomato family
(Solanaceae), including tomato,
pepper, potato, and eggplant, for
at least four years. Corn and
beans are suitable rotation crops
in the home garden.
Late blight
Late blight, caused by the fungus Phytophthora infestans,
rarely occurs in Iowa but can devastate tomato plantings
during periods of cool, rainy weather. Late blight may
infect either young (upper) or old (lower) leaves. It first
appears as water-soaked areas that enlarge rapidly, form-
ing irregular, greenish black blotches (Figure 10), giving
the plant a frost-damaged appearance. The undersides
of the leaves often show a downy white growth in
moist weather. Infection of green or ripe fruit produces
large, irregularly shaped brown blotches (Figure 11).
Infected fruits rapidly deteriorate into foul-smelling
masses. Late blight usually appears in mid- or late
August during persistent cool, wet weather, or when
cool night temperatures cause
frequent heavy dews. P. infestans
causes similar symptoms on
potatoes and can spread from
potatoes to tomatoes.
Control measures for late blight
are the same as for Septoria leaf
spot. In addition, avoid rotating
with potato.
Figure 9. Verticillium wilt foliage symptoms and cut stem
showing browning

Tomato diseases and disorders | Diseases in outdoor production
5
Figure 12. Bacterial spot on leaflet
Bacterial spot
Bacterial spot, caused by the bacterium Xanthomonas
campestris pv. vesicatoria, infects both tomato and pepper.
Spots that appear on leaves and stems are small (up to
1⁄8 inch across), circular to irregular in shape, and have
a slightly greasy feel. Unlike similar-sized spots caused
by the fungus Septoria lycopersici, those caused by the
bacterial spot pathogen do not develop grayish brown
centers. As lesions enlarge, they often become surrounded
by a yellow halo. If spots are numerous, they begin to
grow together (Figure 12), and leaves wither and turn
brown (Figure 13). Fruit symptoms are more distinctive
than leaf or stem symptoms. Spots on green fruit first
appear as black, raised, pimple-like dots surrounded by
water-soaked areas. As the spots enlarge to 1⁄4 to 1⁄2 inch,
they become gray-brown and scabby with sunken, pitted
centers (Figure 14). The bacterium overwinters on the
surface of seeds, in infected debris, and in soil. It is
commonly brought into fields on infected transplants.
Warm, rainy weather favors rapid spread of bacterial spot.
Control measures are essentially the same as for Septoria
leaf spot. However, obtaining disease-free transplants
is particularly crucial for controlling this and other
bacterial diseases, since the bacteria can be transmitted to
seedlings from contaminated seeds. Avoid rotating with
peppers. It is advisable to avoid handling plants (pruning
and tying, for example) any more than is necessary,
because wounds caused by handling allow bacteria to
enter plants. Sprays of a fixed copper product can reduce
spread of the disease in the garden if applications begin
when first symptoms appear. Refer to Insects and Diseases
in the Home Vegetable Garden (PM 230) for current
spray recommendations.
Bacterial speck
This disease, caused by the bacterium Pseudomonas
syringae pv. tomato, does not affect pepper or other
solanaceous crops but may survive on nonhost plants.
Tiny, 1⁄16-inch-diameter, dark spots appear on leaves,
surrounded by yellow halos (Figure 15). However, as with
bacterial spot and bacterial canker, the fruit symptoms are
most characteristic. The numerous specks that develop
on young green fruit are slightly raised, 1⁄32 to 1⁄16 inch in
diameter, and have well-defined margins (Figure 14).
The specks are considerably smaller than the spots caused
by bacterial spot, do not penetrate the fruit deeply, and
can be scraped off with a fingernail. Although bacterial
speck seldom reduces yields greatly, it can harm fruit
quality. Infection is favored by cool (less than 70° F),
wet conditions. Epidemics often follow rainstorms that
cause abrasion of leaves and splash soil onto the foliage.
Figure 13. Wilting caused by bacterial
spot
Figure 14. Fruit spots caused by bacterial speck (left) and
bacterial spot (right)

6
Tomato diseases and disorders | Diseases in outdoor production
P. syringae pv. tomato overwinters
in seed, in plant debris, in soil,
and on many other plants.
To control bacterial speck, follow
the same cultural measures as
for Septoria leaf spot. Plant
only disease-free transplants.
Destroying weeds around a
tomato field or garden will
help to reduce survival of
the causal bacterium. A fixed
copper product can help control
spread of bacterial speck if
applications begin when the
first symptoms appear.
Figure 15. Bacterial speck on leaflet
Bacterial canker
Bacterial canker, caused by
the bacterium Clavibacter
michiganensis subsp.
michiganensis, has caused
serious losses in some tomato
plantings in the North Central
states, including Iowa, during
the last few decades. Young
transplants may wilt suddenly
and completely (Figure 16).
On older plants, leaflets begin
to turn brown at the edges,
then die back progressively
toward the leaf midrib
(Figure 17). Often only
one side of a leaflet or a plant
develops symptoms first, but
symptoms eventually spread.
Rarely, cavities may develop
within stems, sometimes
splitting open into brown,
longitudinal cankers. Spots on
fruit are quite distinctive: white
and slightly raised at first, then
raised, dark-colored centers with
white halos 1⁄16 to 1⁄8 inch in
diameter (Figure 18). These
spots are sometimes termed
“bird’s-eye” lesions. The white
halo turns brown as the spot
becomes older.
Control measures for bacterial
canker are the same as for
bacterial speck, except that
copper sprays have minimal
impact on slowing the spread of
bacterial canker.
Figure 16. Wilting of a young transplant (center) caused by
bacterial canker
Figure 17. Marginal browning of leaves caused by
bacterial canker
Figure 18. Fruit spots caused by bacterial canker

Tomato diseases and disorders | Diseases in outdoor production
7
Viruses
The most common virus disease in Iowa is tomato spotted
wilt virus (TSWV), but others can occur. TSWV causes
distinctive yellow ringspots on mature fruit (Figure 19).
Foliage also can be affected; plants are usually stunted
and tip leaves show a purplish discoloration (Figure 20).
Thrips, which are small (1⁄4 inch long) green-brown
insects, spread the virus. Plants can be affected as trans-
plants while growing in a greenhouse; after transplanting,
stunting and failure to set fruit may be the most notice-
able symptoms (Figure 21).
Other viruses are spread by aphids or leafhoppers and
can cause leaf curling, yellow or green mosaic patterns
on the leaves, “shoestringing” of leaves,
or a bronzing appearance. Fruits also are
affected with mosaic patterns, streaking,
or mottled areas.
Planting only certified virus-free transplants
is the best technique for managing viruses.
It is helpful to verify that the greenhouse used to produce
transplants conducts a vigorous program to control
aphids and thrips. There is no way to “cure” a virus-
infected plant. However, removing the infected plant as
soon as symptoms are found can help prevent spread by
insects to healthy plants. Many viruses that infect tomato
also infect peppers and potatoes; so, avoid planting these
crops next to each other. Insect control may also be
beneficial in the transplant and early-season phases.
Consult Insects and Diseases in the Home Vegetable Garden
(PM 230) for current insecticide recommendations.
Figure 19. TSWV ringspots on a fruit
Figure 20. Purplish discoloration of tip leaves caused
by TSWV
Figure 21. Dwarfing of plant (left) by TSWV

8
Tomato diseases and disorders | Diseases in greenhouse production
Figure 22. Gray mold on fruit
Figure 24. Buff-colored spore masses of
leaf mold on underside of leaflet
Figure 23. Yellow spots caused by leaf mold on upper
leaf surface
Figure 25. Blighting of leaflet by
powdery mildew
Diseases in greenhouse production
High humidity and warm temperatures in greenhouses provide
a favorable environment for development of certain diseases.
The diseases listed below are much more likely to occur inside
greenhouses than outdoors.
Gray mold
Gray mold, caused by the fungus Botrytis cinerea, is a common
disease of greenhouse-grown tomatoes. This disease is characterized
by a light-gray fuzzy growth that appears on stems and leaves.
Soft rot of the stem end of the fruit can also occur (Figure 22).
Botrytis infections are most severe in greenhouses with moderate
temperatures, high humidity, and stagnant air. Increasing ventilation
and air circulation to reduce humidity levels can be helpful, as well as
timely fungicide applications.
Leaf mold
Leaf mold, caused by the fungus Fulvia fulva, can cause problems
in humid greenhouses with poor air circulation. This fungal disease
appears on lower leaves as yellow spots on the upper surface
(Figure 23) and fuzzy masses of buff-colored spores on the underside
(Figure 24). These leaves drop prematurely as the disease progresses
upward on the plant. Lowering greenhouse humidity, planting
resistant varieties, and applying fungicide promptly can be helpful
in leaf mold management.
Powdery mildew
Powdery mildew, caused by the fungus Oidium neolycopersici, is also
common in humid Iowa greenhouses with poor air movement.
Characterized in the early stages by white patches on the upper
surface of leaves, this disease can cause defoliation as the spots
develop into brown lesions (Figure 25). Increasing air circulation
and spacing between plants will reduce powdery mildew problems.
Fungicide sprays also can be effective if used when symptoms are
first noticed.
Good control of powdery mildew can be achieved by using several
fungicides. Fungicides are most effective when sprays begin as soon
as the first symptoms are noticed, rather than after the disease is
already well established.

Tomato diseases and disorders | Physiological disorders
9
Figure 26. Blossom end rot
Figure 27. Radial fruit cracking
Figure 28. Concentric fruit cracking
Physiological disorders
The following problems are not caused by infectious
microorganisms but rather by environmental stresses
on the plant. These disorders occur primarily in field-
grown rather than greenhouse-grown tomatoes.
Blossom end rot
Blossom end rot is a very common problem on green
and ripe tomatoes. It first appears as a sunken, brownish
black spot 1⁄2 to 1 inch
in diameter on the
blossom end of the
fruit. These spots may
gradually increase in
size (Figure 26).
Although blossom
end rot itself causes
only local injury,
secondary organisms
frequently invade
the lesion and cause
complete rotting of the fruit. It often occurs in rapidly
developing fruit during periods of hot, dry weather
and tends to have the greatest impact on the earliest-
maturing fruit.
Blossom end rot is caused by a calcium deficiency that is
related to wide fluctuations in available moisture. Iowa
soils contain plenty of calcium, so the addition of calcium
will not solve the problem. To prevent blossom end rot,
maintain a steady rate of plant growth without stress. A
consistent and ample supply of moisture can reduce the
problem by helping to maintain a steady flow of calcium
from the soil to the fruit. Mulching also will help by
conserving soil moisture. Blossom end rot is more serious
when an excess of nitrogen fertilizer has been applied.
Staking and pruning tomato plants also may increase the
incidence of blossom end rot. If blossom end rot occurs,
remove the affected fruit so that later-maturing fruit will
develop normally. Mulching and avoiding heavy applica-
tions of nitrogen fertilizer may help reduce fruit cracking.
Fruit cracking
Two types of cracks may develop on tomato fruit.
Radial growth cracks radiate from the stem (Figure 27),
and concentric cracks encircle the fruit, usually on the
shoulders
(Figure 28).
Similar to
blossom end
rot, cracking
is associated
with rapid fruit
development
and wide
fluctuations in
water availability
to the plant. Fruit that has
reached the ripening stage
during dry weather may
show considerable cracking
if the dry period is followed
by heavy rains and high
temperatures. Tomato
varieties differ considerably
in the amount and severity
of cracking under climatic
conditions. Supersonic and Jetstar are two varieties
that show relatively low incidence of cracking.
As with blossom end rot, mulching and avoiding heavy
applications of nitrogen fertilizer should help reduce
fruit cracking.

10
Tomato diseases and disorders | Physiological disorders
Figure 29. Catfaced fruit
Figure 30. Sunscald
Figure 31. Blotchy ripening
Catfaced fruit
Catfacing is a term used to describe misshapen fruit
with irregular bulges at the blossom end and bands of
leathery scar tissue (Figure 29). Cold weather at the
time of blossom set distorts and kills certain cells that
should develop into fruit, resulting in the deformities.
The disorder is most often observed among first-formed
fruit. Catfacing is most common in the large-fruited
“beefsteak” type tomatoes.
Sunscald
Sunscald occurs on green tomato fruit exposed to the sun.
The initial symptom is a whitish, shiny area that appears
blistered. The killed, bleached tissues gradually collapse,
forming a slightly sunken area that may become pale
yellowish and wrinkled as the fruit ripens (Figure 30).
The killed tissue is quickly invaded by secondary organ-
isms and the fruit decays.
Fruits most subject to sunscald are those that have been
exposed suddenly to the sun because of pruning, natural
spreading of the plant caused by a heavy fruit load, or loss
of foliage from diseases. The extent of the injury is more
serious during periods of abnormally high temperatures.
To prevent sunscald on tomato fruit, control foliar dis-
eases and avoid heavy pruning or shoot removal.
Blotchy ripening
This physiological disorder is indicated by the absence of
normal red pigment on localized areas of the fruit. These
areas appear as yellow or gray-green patches on otherwise
normal-colored ripening fruit (Figure 31). When these
fruits are sliced open, brown discoloration is often apparent.
Climatic, nutritional, and cultural problems may
contribute to blotchy ripening. Low levels of potassium in
plants and prolonged cloudy periods or inadequate light
intensity have been associated with the disorder. Other
possible contributing factors are high soil moisture,
high humidity, low temperature, soil compaction, and
excessive fertilization. These environmental factors
can contribute to nutrient deficiencies or other
imbalances that impede development of red pigment
in the fruit. To minimize incidence of blotchy ripening,
follow proper cultural practices to maintain nutritional
balance and plant vigor. If commercial fertilizers are used,
select balanced formulations and avoid over-application.

Tomato diseases and disorders | Physiological disorders
11
Figure 33. Herbicide damage
Figure 32. Physiological leafroll
Physiological leafroll
Physiological leafroll
occurs when the edges
of the leaves roll upward
and inward (Figure 32).
Sometimes the curling
continues until the leaf
margins from either side
touch or overlap. Some
leaves on the plant may
not exhibit rolling.
Leafroll does not reduce
plant growth, yield,
or fruit quality. It is
believed to result
from irregular water supply, and may be intensified
following pruning. The symptoms are sometimes
temporary, disappearing after a few days, but can
persist throughout the growing season.
Failure to set fruit
High summer temperatures can reduce the number of
tomato fruit harvested in several ways. High day and
night temperatures will reduce flower production on
tomato plants. If the night temperatures are above 70° F,
flower production and pollination are reduced. High
temperatures for several consecutive days, coupled with
drought conditions, will lead to poor pollination and
cause flowers to drop from the plants. Hot drying winds
may intensify the problem. Plants sometimes drop their
flowers when night temperatures are lower than 55° F.
The most favorable night range for tomato fruit set is
between 58 and 68° F. Commercially available blossom-set
hormones should not be relied upon because they do not
give consistent results.
Herbicide injury
This malady is caused by misapplication or drift of 2,4-D,
MCPP, and other growth regulator herbicides. Tomato
plants are highly sensitive to these chemicals throughout
the growing season. The first symptom is downward
curling of leaves and tips of growing points. Leaves
often become narrow and twisted toward the tip, with
prominent, light-colored veins. The symptoms are most
pronounced on portions of the plant that were actively
growing when the exposure occurred. In severe cases,
stems and petioles become thick, stiff, and brittle with
warty outgrowths (Figure 33). Affected plants usually
recover. However, the fruit may become catfaced or
develop in a plum shape, and may be hollow and seedless.
To avoid herbicide injury, do not spray when wind may
carry spray drift toward tomatoes or other sensitive crops.
In addition, spray at low pressures, use a coarse-spray
nozzle, and apply the spray as close to the ground as
possible. Avoid applying other pesticides in sprayers that
have previously contained herbicide because traces of
herbicide are likely to remain in the sprayer even after
thorough rinsing.

12
Tomato diseases and disorders | For more information
For more information
Contact your local Iowa State University Extension
office for additional information or copies of the
following publications.
Canning and Freezing Tomatoes, PM 638
Container Vegetable Garden, PM 870B
Garden Soil Management, PM 820
Organic Mulches for Gardens and Landscape Plantings,
RG 209
Planting a Home Vegetable Garden, PM 819
Preserve Food Safely, N 3332
Questions about Composting, RG 206
Selling Fruits and Vegetables, PM 1887
Small Plot Vegetable Gardens, PM 870A
Starting Garden Transplants at Home, PM 874
Watering the Home Garden—Use of Trickle Irrigation,
PM 823
Where to Put Your Vegetable Garden, PM 814
Prepared by Mark L. Gleason, extension plant pathologist, and Brooke A. Edmunds, graduate assistant, Department of Plant Pathology.
Edited by Jean McGuire, extension communication specialist. Illustrated by Jane Lenahan, extension graphic designer. Designed by
Donna Halloum, Creative Services, Instructional Technology Center, Iowa State University.
Photography—Figure 2: Ron Pitblado, Ridgetown College, Ontario, Canada; Figure 4: University of Illinois; Figure 8, Clemson
University; Figures 10 and 14: Alan MacNab, Penn State University; Figure 15: Jon Watterson; Figures 17 and 18: Richard X. Latin,
Purdue University.
File: Hort and LA 2-9
. . . and justice for all
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, gender,
religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Many materials
can be made available in alternative formats for ADA clients. To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W,
Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964.
Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, Acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Jack M. Payne, director, Cooperative Extension Service, Iowa State University of Science and Technology, Ames, Iowa.
Additional information
also is available from these Web sites.
ISU Extension publications
http://www.extension.iastate.edu/store
ISU Horticulture
http://www.hort.iastate.edu/
Questions also may be directed to
ISU Extension Hortline by calling 515-294-3108 during
business hours (10 a.m.–12 noon, 1 p.m.–4:30 p.m.
Monday–Friday).
If you want to learn more about horticulture through
training and volunteer work, ask your ISU Extension
office for information about the ISU Extension Master
Gardener program.