COMMON TOMATO DISEASES 
in Kentucky Gardens 
Early Blight (fungus) - Leaves have dark brown spots with concentric rings or target board  
pattern in the spots; disease begins on lower foliage and works up with severely affected leaves 
shriveling and dying; similar spots can occur on stems and fruits; can be confused with other leaf 
spots, but this is most common.  Maintain proper fertility.  Spray foliage with fungicide at first sign of 
disease and as needed (weekly during hot, humid weather) thereafter; use chlorothalonil, mancozeb 
or fixed copper.  Good coverage is needed.  Make second planting in midsummer for fall crop.  A 
few early blight tolerant varieties are now available. 
Early blight on tomato foliage 
Photograph courtesy of  
University of Kentucky  
IPM  Team 
Early Blight 
Alternaria solani 
Severe early blight on tomato fruit 
Photograph courtesy of  
University of Kentucky  
IPM  Team 
Severe early blight on  
tomato plant 
Photograph courtesy of  
University of Kentucky 
IPM  Team 
Blossom End Rot 
Blossom End Rot (environmental) - It is a 
physiological disorder (non-parasitic disease). 
Black or brown leathery decay is found on the  
blossom end of fruit and is practically worthless. 
Blossom end rot is a deficiency of calcium  
usually brought on by moisture stress even 
though there is enough calcium in the soil.   
Mulch plants to conserve moisture; avoid deep 
cultivation and pruning of the roots.  Irrigate 
plants to maintain uniform soil moisture levels 
as needed.  Lime soil as needed according to 
soil test results. 
Blossom End Rot 
Photograph courtesy of  
University of Kentucky IPM  Team 

 2 
Bacterial Spot 
Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria 
Bacterial Spot (bacteria) - Begins as small, dark, water-soaked areas which become dark 
brown and slightly raised on the underside of the leaf.  Spots often enlarge, and may be either 
dark colored or have tan colored centers with dark margins.  The size and shape of leaf spots 
may vary under different conditions. Leaves with too many spots promptly turn yellow and drop, 
defoliating the plants.  Fruit blemishes begin as small, water-soaked spots which enlarge,  
becoming blister-like, rough, and warty.  The spots are brown and seldom exceed 1/4 inch in  
diameter.  Often the disease extends into the seed cavity.  Use certified, disease-free  
transplants.  Rotate with unrelated crops from one year to another.  Only handle plants when 
they are dry to avoid spreading the bacteria.  Spray foliage with fixed copper at first sign of  
disease. 
Bacterial spot on foliage 
Photograph courtesy of  
University of Kentucky  
IPM  Team 
Bacterial spot on foliage 
Photograph courtesy of  
University of Kentucky  
IPM  Team 
Septoria Leaf Spot 
Septoria lycopersici 
Septoria Leaf Spot (fungus) - Small, brown, 
circular spots form on leaves, usually first  
observed in lower foliage.  Similar to early 
blight, but often develops earlier in the season.  
Circular lesions with darkened borders and  
tan-brown centers are characteristic of this  
disease.  Spots can be numerous under  
favorable conditions, resulting in severe  
blighting.  See “Early Blight” for management  
considerations. 
Septoria leaf spot on tomato 
Photograph courtesy of University of Kentucky 
IPM Team 
Bacterial Spot on fruit 
Photograph courtesy of Kenneth 
Seebold, University of Kentucky 

 3 
 
 
Late Blight 
Phytophthora infestans 
Powdery Mildew 
Leveillula taurica 
Powdery Mildew (fungus) - Powdery mildew 
is found mainly on tomatoes grown in  
greenhouses and high tunnels, but can be found 
on field-grown tomatoes during dry summers.  
The disease is characterized by a white,  
talc-like growth on upper and lower leaf  
surfaces.  Over time, necrotic areas will form, 
resulting in blighting of affected leaves.  Stems 
may be infected in severe outbreaks.   
Management includes proper plant spacing, ad-
equate ventilation in greenhouses, and  
fungicide applications. 
Powdery mildew on tomato foliage 
Photograph courtesy of University of Kentucky 
IPM Team 
Late Blight (fungus) - Nationally, the potential for late blight has increased greatly, but this  
disease is relatively rare in Kentucky.  Dead areas on leaves, brown or dark purple color, variable 
in size with white or gray moldy growth on leaf undersides during cool, moist weather; fruits may  
develop dark brown or greenish blemishes, usually on stem and during cool, moist weather.  
See “Tomato Early Blight” for fungicides.  Use disease-free transplants. 
 
Late blight on tomato 
Photograph courtesy of  
John Hartman 
University of Kentucky  
Symptoms of late blight  
Photograph courtesy of Kenneth Seebold,  
University of Kentucky 

 4 
The information in this publication is adapted from Home Vegetable Gardening in Kentucky (ID-128), Dr. Richard  
Durham, Department of Horticulture, Editor, and An IPM Scouting Guide for Common Pests of Solanaceous Crops in 
Kentucky (ID-172), Dr. Timothy Coolong, Department of Horticulture, Editor, from the University of Kentucky Cooperative 
Extension Service. 
Additional Resources 
Home Vegetable Gardening in Kentucky, 
ID-128 (2011) 
http://www.ca.uky.edu/agc/pubs/id/id128/ 
id128.pdf 
 
IPM Scouting Guide for Common Pests 
of Solanaceous Crops in Kentucky, ID-172 
(2008) 
http://www.ca.uky.edu/agc/pubs/id/id172/ 
id172.pdf 
The University of Kentucky publications listed below are available at County Extension offices, as 
well as on the Internet. 
Recognizing Late Blight on Tomato 
Seedlings, PPFS-VG-14 (2011) 
http://www.ca.uky.edu/agcollege/ 
plantpathology/ext_files/PPFShtml/PPFSVG- 
14.pdf 
 
Late Blight of Tomato 
PPFS-VG-13 (2011) 
http://www.ca.uky.edu/agcollege/ 
plantpathology/ext_files/PPFShtml/PPFSVG- 
13.pdf