Division of Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources  •  Oklahoma State University
EPP-7625
Oklahoma Cooperative Extension Fact Sheets 
are also available on our website at: 
http://osufacts.okstate.edu
Oklahoma Cooperative Extension Service
John P. Damicone	
Extension Plant Pathologist
Lynn Brandenberger
Extension Horticulturist
	
Diseases are a major limiting factor for tomato produc­
tion. Diseases can be classified into two groups. The first 
are those caused by infectious microorganisms that include 
fungi, bacteria, viruses and nematodes. These diseases are 
contagious and can spread from plant to plant in a field, often 
very rapidly when environmental conditions are favorable. 
The second group includes those caused by non-infectious 
physical or chemical factors, such as adverse environmental 
factors, nutritional or physiological disorders and herbicide 
injury. Non-infectious diseases cannot spread from plant to 
plant; however, the distribution of the disease may be quite 
uniform and extensive if an entire planting was exposed to 
the adverse factor.
	
It is critical for effective disease control to recognize the 
difference between infectious and non-infectious diseases, 
and the type of microorganism causing an infectious disease 
be determined. For example, use of a fungicide to control 
a non-infectious disease, such as blossom-end rot, is a 
wasted expense that will not correct the problem. This Fact 
Sheet is intended to aid vegetable producers in recogniz­
ing the symptoms of common tomato diseases caused by 
fungi. Fungi are the most common cause of infectious plant 
diseases and can be very destructive. Diseases of tomatoes 
caused by bacteria, viruses, and nematodes are described 
in Extension Fact Sheet EPP-7626. Non-infectious diseases 
of tomato are covered in Extension Fact Sheet EPP-7627. 
Often, symptoms of diseases are non-typical or confusing. 
It is a good practice to submit samples of diseased plants 
to the OSU Plant Disease and Insect Diagnostic Laboratory 
for an accurate diagnosis, particularly when a new disease 
is encountered.
	
Control of tomato diseases is best if all available methods 
(i.e. cultural practices, disease resistant varieties, and use 
of chemicals) are integrated into an overall management 
strategy. Cultural practices are aimed at avoiding disease or 
delaying its occurrence. It is critical to start with disease-free 
transplants because many infectious diseases may be car­
ried on tomato seed. Crop rotation is another cultural practice 
for reducing losses from plant diseases. It is important to 
remember that vegetables such as pepper, eggplant and 
potato should be avoided in rotations with tomatoes. These 
crops are susceptible to many of the same diseases. Cultural 
management of the crop will also influence what diseases 
may develop. Tomatoes allowed to spread on the ground 
will develop more soil rot problems, while fruit on staked or 
trellised plants will be exposed more to sunscald. Tomatoes 
irrigated by sprinkler systems that wet the foliage and fruit are 
more likely to develop disease problems than those watered 
by drip or furrow systems. 
	
Planting disease-resistant varieties is probably the most 
effective and economical method of disease control. Disease 
resistance can be utilized to solve current problems or to 
prevent a disease from increasing. Fortunately, many excel­
lent tomato varieties have been developed with resistance to 
one or more of the common tomato diseases. The letters “V” 
(Verticillium wilt), “F” (Fusarium wilt), “N” (root-knot nematode), 
“T” or “TMV” (tobacco mosaic virus), “A” or “ASC” (Alternaria 
stem canker) and “S” or “St” (Stemphyllium-gray leaf spot) 
appear in the variety descriptions in seed catalogs or on 
seed packages to designate resistance to the corresponding 
diseases. Strains of the Fusarium wilt fungus have developed 
that can overcome previously resistant varieties. “F1” indicates 
resistance to the original strain (race 1), while “F2 and F3” 
indicate resistance to new strains (races 2 and 3). Extension 
Fact Sheet HLA-6032 lists many disease-resistant tomato 
varieties known to perform well in Oklahoma.
	
Chemical control is sometimes necessary because re­
sistance is not yet available for some important diseases. The 
registration status, rates, timings and method of application 
of fungicides often change. Consult the current Extension 
Agents Handbook of Insect, Plant Disease and Weed Control 
(E-832) or the local county Extension educator for the latest 
recommendations for chemical control of tomato diseases.
Wilts & Blights
Fusarium Wilt 
(Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. lycopersici)
	
Wilt diseases are caused by pathogens that invade the 
vascular system (xylem tissue) and disrupt water flow through 
the plant. Fusarium wilt is the major wilt disease of tomato in 
Oklahoma. Verticillium wilt is easily confused with Fusarium 
wilt, but has not yet been reported in Oklahoma.
	
The first symptom is usually a yellowing of the lower leaves, 
which gradually wilt and die. Symptoms may first occur on 
only one side of the plant (Figure 1). The disease progresses 
up the stem until all of the foliage is killed and the plant dies. 
If stems or petioles from wilted areas of diseased plants are 
Common Diseases 
of Tomatoes
Part I. Diseases Caused by Fungi

EPP-7625-2
cut, a reddish-brown discoloration can be seen between the 
pith (center of the stem) and the outer green part of the stem 
(Figure 2).
	
The fungus survives and persists indefinitely in field 
soil. The fungus is also seedborne and is thought to spread 
long distances in this manner. The disease is most serious in 
sandy soils and at temperatures between 80 F to 90 F. Soils 
become infested by planting infected transplants and from 
movement of infested soil by wind and water erosion or on 
farm implements.
	
Control: Growing tomato varieties resistant to Fusarium 
wilt is the most effective means of control. Improved varieties 
and hybrids are available that have resistance to races 1 and 2; 
and 1,2 and 3. Resistant varieties can become susceptible to 
Fusarium wilt through time when they are intensively cropped 
on the same site. For example race 3 has been reported in 
other states where tomatoes are intensively grown. Crop ro­
tation should be used in conjunction with varietal resistance 
to maintain sustainable control and limit the development of 
new races.
Southern Blight (Sclerotium rolfsii)
	
Southern blight can be a devastating disease of tomatoes 
in Oklahoma. The southern blight fungus has a wide host 
range attacking more than 200 species of plants that include 
common weeds and crop plants.
	
The initial symptom of southern blight is a rapid wilting of 
the entire plant. A water-soaked lesion on the stem near the 
soil line rapidly expands, turns brown and girdles the stem. 
A white mold (mycelium) eventually covers the stem lesion 
and surrounding moist soil. Small, uniformly round structures 
about 1/16 inch in diameter (called sclerotia) form on the 
mycelium. Sclerotia are first white, later becoming brown, and 
resemble mustard seeds. The presence of the white mycelium 
and sclerotia at stem base of affected plants are very useful 
characteristics for identifying southern blight (Figure 3).
	
The fungus survives in the soil as sclerotia, which may 
build to high numbers when susceptible plants are cropped 
repeatedly. After sclerotia germinate, the fungus must first 
colonize organic debris near the soil surface before the fungus 
can cause infection. The disease is favored by high humid­
ity and soil moisture and warm to hot temperatures (85 F to 
95 F).
	
Control: Southern blight is difficult to control when condi­
tions favor the disease and numbers of sclerotia in the soil are 
high. Crop rotation with a non-susceptible grass crop, such 
as corn, is the most effective means of reducing numbers 
of sclerotia and resulting incidence of southern blight. Avoid 
planting tomato following a very susceptible crop such as 
cantaloupe or watermelon. Plant residues should be thoroughly 
incorporated into the soil prior to transplanting so their pres­
ence on the soil surface does not encourage southern blight 
development. A fungicide program for southern blight may be 
benificial.
Foliar Diseases
Early Blight (Alternaria solani)
	
Early blight is a common leaf-spotting fungal disease of 
tomato. Extensive defoliation from early blight exposes fruit 
to sunscald and increases fruit rot. Early blight also attacks 
stems and fruit. Foliar diseases are most severe in eastern 
Oklahoma where rainfall and relative humidity levels support 
disease development, or wherever sprinkler irrigation is used.
	
Dark brown cankers may develop on stems and girdle 
stems of seedlings at the soil line. Stem lesions on older 
plants usually remain confined to one side of the stem. Leaf 
symptoms appear on older leaves first and are characteristic 
of the disease. Infected leaves show circular spots (lesions) 
up to 1/2 inch in diameter that are brown and have a pattern 
of concentric rings imparting a “target-like” appearance to 
the spot (Figure 4). The leaf area surrounding these spots 
may turn yellow. Infected leaves eventually turn brown and 
drop from the plant. Defoliation progresses upward from the 
Figure 1. Fusarium wilt—Initial symptoms are yellowing 
and wilting of branches and later, entire plants (photo 
courtesy R.G. Gardner, North Carolina State University. )
Figure 2. Fusarium wilt—Internal discoloration of stem. 
(Photo courtesy Clemson University, USDA Cooperative Slide 
Series, Bugwood.org)

EPP-7625-3
lower plant. Sunken, dry lesions occur most frequently on the 
stem end of the fruit and also have a zonate or “target-like” 
appearance.
	
The fungus survives in the soil by forming resistant 
spores in association with diseased tomato debris capable of 
persisting for one year or more. Infection occurs rapidly under 
warm, humid conditions. Thousands of spores are produced 
in spots of infected leaves and are capable of causing more 
infections. Plants under stress from nitrogen deficiency, heavy 
fruit load or other factors are most susceptible to the disease.
	
Control: Crop rotation with crops other than eggplant, 
potato and pepper should be practiced to reduce and delay 
early blight development. Avoid prolonged wetting of leaves 
from irrigation or use drip irrigation. Maintain adequate, but 
not excessive, soil fertility. A spray program using a recom­
mended fungicide beginning at fruit set and continuing on 
a 7- to 14-day schedule should be maintained where early 
blight problems are anticipated.
Septoria Leaf Spot (Septoria lycopersici)
	
Septoria is a very common foliage disease in Oklahoma 
that may also attack stems, but not fruit. The disease first ap­
pears on the lower leaves after the plant has set fruit. Leaf 
spots begin as yellow areas that later become circular with 
gray centers and dark borders (Figure 5). Spots may reach 
1/8 inch in diameter and be surrounded by a yellow halo. Tiny 
black specks may develop in the center of these spots. These 
are fruiting structures that release spores. Severely infected 
leaves fall off. Defoliation progresses from the base of the 
plant upwards and resembles early blight from a distance. 
However, the larger dark leaf spots with concentric rings of 
early blight are clearly different from smaller Septoria leaf 
spots. Loss of foliage may cause fruits to become sunscalded.
	
Most infection early in the season probably arises from 
infested plant debris remaining in the soil from a previous 
tomato crop. Spores of the fungus are spread by splashing 
rain. The disease is favored by moderate temperatures and 
extended periods of high relative humidity.
	
Control: Crop rotation and thorough shredding and 
incorporation of infested plant residue soon after harvest are 
recommended to reduce Septoria leaf spot. Weed control 
should be maintained because jimsonweed, horse nettle 
and nightshade are also sources of infection. Drip is recom­
mended to reduce periods of leaf wetness and water splashing. 
Sprinkler irrigation should not be used. Avoid working plants 
while foliage is wet. A fungicide spray program for early blight 
will also be effective for control of Septoria leaf spot.
Gray Leaf Spot (Stemphyllium solani)
	
This is a disease confined entirely to the leaves of tomato. 
The oldest leaves are affected first. Symptoms first appear as 
small brownish-black flecks that extend to both sides of the 
leaf. Spots may be bordered by a narrow yellow halo. As the 
spots enlarge, the central portion becomes gray, cracks and 
falls out imparting a shot-hole appearance to affected leaves. 
The disease closely resembles Septoria leaf spot. Leaves 
with numerous spots turn yellow and drop to the ground. The 
fungus overwinters on infected plant residue. The disease is 
favored by warm temperatures, high humidity, heavy fruit loads 
and adequate levels of soil fertility.
	
Control: Many of the newer tomato varieties recom­
mended for growth in Oklahoma are resistant to gray leaf 
spot. If a susceptible variety is grown, cultural and chemical 
controls are similar to those for early blight and Septoria leaf 
spot.
Late Blight (Phytophthora infestans)
	
Late blight, an important potato disease, can also occur on 
tomato. The warm to hot temperatures prevailing in Oklahoma 
during periods of tomato production make the occurrence of 
this disease unlikely. However, the disease could be a poten­
tial problem during unseasonably cool and wet conditions on 
early-planted or fall-cropped tomatoes. All parts of the plant 
are affected and fruit decay can be severe.
	
Symptoms appear on the upper surface of leaves as 
greasy, gray spots that expand rapidly when leaves are wet or 
humidity is high (Figure 6). White mold usually develops at the 
Figure 3.  Southern blight—White moldy growth (mycelium) 
and basal stem canker. (Photo courtesy Ed Sikora, Auburn 
University, Bugwood.org)
Figure 4.  Early blight—Leaf symptoms are large (up to 
1/2 inch diameter), brown, zonate or target-like spots.
(Photo courtesy M. McGrath, Cornell University)

margins of affected areas. If stems and petioles are infected, 
areas above these infections wilt and die. Entire plants may 
be rapidly defoliated when conditions favor the disease. Fruit 
infections begin as brown, greasy spots that rapidly expand 
to rot the entire fruit.
	
The fungus is a wet weather disease favored by cool 
nights and warm days. Temperatures above 86 F are con­
sidered unfavorable for late blight development. The fungus 
survives mainly in potato seed tubers and in infected tomato 
transplants. Some survival may also occur in dead potato 
and tomato vines. The disease often begins in potato plants, 
from which spores of the fungus are blown by wind to infect 
tomatoes in favorable conditions. Disease development is rapid 
with extended periods of favorable conditions and ceases 
when weather becomes hot and dry.
	
Control: Late blight control centers on use of disease-free 
transplants and certified disease-free potato seed to avoid 
introduction of the disease. Tomatoes should be planted as 
far as possible from potatoes and potato cull piles. Dead vines 
from previous crops should be removed from the vicinity of new 
plantings or destroyed. Avoid use of sprinkler irrigation where 
possible. A fungicide spray program is required to control late 
blight.
Fruit Rots
Anthracnose (Colletotrichum phomoides)
	
Anthracnose is a common and widespread rot of ripe 
or overripe tomato fruit. Symptoms are rare on green fruit. 
Symptoms on ripe fruit are small, sunken, circular spots that 
may increase in size up to 1/2 inch in diameter. The center 
of older spots later become blackish (Figure 7). Spots may 
Figure 5. Septoria leaf spot—Leaf symptoms are small (1/8-
inch diameter) spots with gray centers and dark borders. 
become numerous in severe cases, and secondary rotting 
organisms may invade anthracnose lesions to completely rot 
infected fruit.
	
The fungus forms small, dark survival structures called 
sclerotia in the centers of fruit spots. These sclerotia survive in 
soil for up to three years, and cause infections either directly 
or by producing secondary spores. Green fruit are infected 
but do not show symptoms until ripening. The fungus then 
spreads from infected to healthy fruit as spores are splashed 
by rain or overhead irrigation, or by pickers working wet plants. 
Anthracnose is favored by warm rainy weather, overhead ir­
rigation and heavy defoliation from foliar disease.
	
Control: Harvest fruit as soon as possible after ripening. 
Avoid excessive overhead irrigation or use drip irrigation to 
reduce moisture levels on fruit and humidity in the plant canopy. 
Fungicide sprays used to control leaf diseases reduce losses 
from anthracnose when applied on a regular schedule and 
in a manner to achieve thorough fruit coverage. A three-year 
rotation may also reduce chances for infection.
Soil Rots
	
Soil rots are caused by several fungi which reside in soil 
and infect fruit in direct contact with the soil or are splashed 
into lower fruit near the soil. Warm, wet conditions and growth 
of tomatoes in poorly drained areas favor soil rot development. 
Ripe fruit is generally most vulnerable to soil rot development, 
however green fruit may also be affected. 
Buckeye rot (Phytophthora nicotinae)
	
Buckeye rot is a destructive fruit rot of green or ripe fruit. 
The first symptoms are grayish-green or brownish, water-
soaked spots developing where fruit contact the soil or where 
Figure 6.  Late blight—Foliage symptoms are dark blotches 
surrounded by pale green borders. (Photo courtesy G. 
Holmes, California Polytechnic State University, Bugwood.org)
EPP-7625-4

Figure 7. Anthracnose—Fruit rot symptoms are circular, 
sunken spots with dark centers that become enlarged 
and more depressed as fruit ripen.
soil frequently splashes onto fruit. When temperatures are 
warm (more than 80 F) the spot rapidly enlarges to cover up 
to half of the fruit diameter. The rot then appears brown with 
concentric rings that resemble the markings of a buckeye 
chestnut (Figure 8). The disease is most severe in poorly 
drained areas.
	
Southern blight (Sclerotium rolfsii)
	
The southern blight fungus causes a sunken, yellowish 
lesion to develop where ripe fruit contact the surface of infested 
soil. The lesion enlarges to become star-shaped and water-
soaked. The entire fruit collapses within 3 days to 4 days. A 
mass of white mold and developing sclerotia become evident 
on the lower side of rotted fruit.
Pythium rot (Pythium spp.)
	
Pythium rot begins as a small water-soaked spot where 
the fruit contacts the soil. Within 72 hours, the entire fruit 
becomes rotted, the skin ruptures and the watery contents 
of the fruit spill out. A white, cottony growth may be observed 
within rotted areas of the fruit under humid conditions.
Rhizoctonia soil rot (Rhizoctonia solani)
	
Rhizoctonia causes a brown rot with alternating light- and 
dark-colored zonate bands and sharply defined margins in 
areas where fruit contact soil. The rot may be firm at first, but 
later, affected fruit becomes mushy.
	
Control: Tomatoes should be staked or otherwise held 
upright to minimize fruit contact with soil. Avoid planting 
tomatoes in poorly drained soils or in low areas of a field. 
Mulching with plastic film or with organic matter to keep fruit 
from contacting the soil and/or to reduce soil splashing onto 
fruit will reduce the chance of soil rot infection. A fungicide 
spray schedule for foliar disease control may also help reduce 
infection, provided coverage of the fruit is achieved.
References
Sherf, A.F. and MacNab, A.A. 1986. Vegetable Diseases and 
Their Control, 2nd Ed. John Wiley & Sons, NY, 728pp.
Jones, J.B., Jones, J.P.,Stall, R.E., and Zitter, T.A. 1991. Com­
pendium of Tomato Diseases. APS Press, St.Paul, 73pp.
	
	
Figure 8. Buckeye rot—Brown concentric rings resemble 
markings of a buckeye chestnut. (Photo courtesy L.L. Black, 
Louisiana State University)
EPP-7625-5

EPP-7625-6
Oklahoma State University, in compliance with Title VI and VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Executive Order 11246 as amended, and Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Higher 
Education Act), the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, and other federal and state laws and regulations, does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, genetic informa­
tion, sex, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, disability, or status as a veteran, in any of its policies, practices or procedures.  This provision includes, but is not limited to admissions, 
employment, financial aid, and educational services. The Director of Equal Opportunity, 408 Whitehurst, OSU, Stillwater, OK 74078-1035; Phone 405-744-5371; email: eeo@okstate.edu has 
been designated to handle inquiries regarding non-discrimination policies: Director of Equal Opportunity. Any person (student, faculty, or staff) who believes that discriminatory practices have 
been engaged in based on gender may discuss his or her concerns and file informal or formal complaints of possible violations of Title IX with OSU’s Title IX Coordinator 405-744-9154.
 
Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director of Oklahoma Cooperative Extension 
Service, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma. This publication is printed and issued by Oklahoma State University as authorized by the Vice President, Dean, and Director of the 
Division of Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources and has been prepared and distributed at a cost of $1.00 per copy. Revised 0715 GH.
The Oklahoma Cooperative Extension Service 
Bringing the University to You!
for people of all ages.  It is designated to take 
the knowledge of the university to those persons 
who do not or cannot participate in the formal 
classroom instruction of the university.
•	
It utilizes research from university, government, 
and other sources to help people make their own 
decisions.
•	
More than a million volunteers help multiply the 
impact of the Extension professional staff.
•	
It dispenses no funds to the public.
•	
It is not a regulatory agency, but it does inform 
people of regulations and of their options in meet­
ing them.
•	
Local programs are developed and carried out in 
full recognition of national problems and goals.
•	
The Extension staff educates people through 
personal contacts, meetings, demonstrations, 
and the mass media.
•	
Extension has the built-in flexibility to adjust its 
programs and subject matter to meet new needs. 
Activities shift from year to year as citizen groups 
and Extension workers close to the problems 
advise changes.
The Cooperative Extension Service is the largest, 
most successful informal educational organization in 
the world. It is a nationwide system funded and guided 
by a partnership of federal, state, and local govern­
ments that delivers information to help people help 
themselves through the land-grant university system.
Extension carries out programs in the broad catego­
ries of  agriculture, natural resources and environment; 
family and consumer sciences; 4-H and other youth; 
and community resource development. Extension 
staff members live and work among the people they 
serve to help stimulate and educate Americans to 
plan ahead and cope with their problems.
Some characteristics of the Cooperative Extension 
system are:
• 	
The federal, state, and local governments 
cooperatively share in its financial support and 
program direction.
•	
It is administered by the land-grant university as 
designated by the state legislature through an 
Extension director.
•	
Extension programs are nonpolitical, objective, 
and research-based information.
•	
It provides practical, problem-oriented education